Many languages have facilities for _metaprogramming_: that is, for writing code that generates or modifies code. Python has facilities for dynamic metaprogramming: features like decorators, metaclasses, and many more. These features make Python very flexible and productive, but since they're dynamic, they come with runtime overhead. Other languages have static or compile-time metaprogramming features, like C preprocessor macros and C++ templates. These can be limiting and hard to use.

To support Modular's work in AI, Mojo aims to provide powerful, easy-to-use metaprogramming with zero runtime cost. This compile-time metaprogramming uses the same language as runtime programs, so you don't have to learn a new language—just a few new features.

The main new feature is _parameters_. You can think of a parameter as a compile-time variable that becomes a runtime constant. This usage of "parameter" is probably different from what you're used to from other languages, where "parameter" and "argument" are often used interchangeably. In Mojo, "parameter" and "parameter expression" refer to compile-time values, and "argument" and "expression" refer to runtime values. 

In Mojo, you can add parameters to a struct or function. You can also define 
named parameter expressions—aliases—that you can use as runtime constants.

## Parameterized functions

To define a _parameterized function_, add parameters in square brackets ahead
of the argument list. Each parameter is formatted just like an argument: a 
parameter name, followed by a colon and a type (which is required). In the
following example, the function has a single parameter, `count` of type `Int`. 


```python
fn repeatcount: Int:
    @unroll
    for i in range(count):
        print(msg)
```

(The `@unroll` directive shown here 
unrolls loops at compile time. The directive only works if the loop limits are
compile-time constants.)

Calling a parameterized function, you provide values for the parameters, just like function arguments: 


```python
repeat3
```

    Hello
    Hello
    Hello
    

 
 The compiler resolves the parameter values during compilation, and creates a
 concrete version of the `repeat[]()` function for each unique parameter value.
 After resolving the parameter values and unrolling the loop, the `repeat[3]()`
 function would be roughly equivalent to this:

```python
fn repeat_3(msg: String):
    print(msg)
    print(msg)
    print(msg)
```



This doesn't represent actual code generated by the compiler. By the
time parameters are resolved, Mojo code has already been transformed to an
intermediate representation in MLIR.



If the compiler can't resolve all parameter values to constant values, 
compilation fails.


## Parameterized structs

You can also add parameters to structs. You can use parameterized structs to
build generic containers. For example, a generic array type might include
code like this:


```python
struct GenericArray[T: AnyRegType]:
    var data: Pointer[T]
    var size: Int

    fn __init__(inout self, *elements: T):
        self.size = len(elements)
        self.data = Pointer[T].alloc(self.size)
        for i in range(self.size):
            self.data[i] = elements[i]

    fn __del__(owned self):
        self.data.free()

    fn __getitem__(self, i: Int) raises -> T:
        if (i < self.size):
            return self.data[i]
        else:
            raise Error("Out of bounds")
```

This struct has a single parameter, `T`, which is a placeholder for the data
type you want to store in the array, sometimes called a _type parameter_. `T` is
typed as `AnyRegType`, which is a 
_metatype_ representing any 
register-passable type. This
means our `GenericArray` can hold fixed-size data types like integers and 
floating-point numbers that can be passed in a machine register, but not 
dynamically allocated data like strings or vectors.



Using a capital `T` as the parameter doesn't have any special significance to
the compiler, but it's a convention in a number of languages to use a short name
for a type parameter, frequently defaulting to `T` (for "type"). 



As with parameterized functions, you need to pass in parameter values when you
use a parameterized struct. In this case, when you create an instance of 
`GenericArray`, you need to specify the type you want to store, like `Int`, or
`Float64`. (This is a little confusing, because the _parameter value_ you're
passing in this case is a _type_. That's OK: a Mojo type is a valid compile-time
value.)

You'll see that `T` is used throughout the struct where you'd usually see a 
type name. For example, as the formal type for the `elements` in the 
constructor, and the return type of the `__getitem__()` method.

At the moment, this code only works with register-passable types, which is why
the type parameter `T` is limited to `AnyRegType`. There's also an
`AnyType` metatype, which includes 
**all** Mojo types.

Here's an example of using `GenericArray`:


```python
var array = GenericArrayInt
for i in range(array.size):
    print(array[i], sep=" ", end="")
```

    1  2  3  4  

A parameterized struct can use the `Self` type to represent a concrete instance
of the struct (that is, with all its parameters specified). For example, you
could add a static factory method to `GenericArray` with the following
signature:

```python
struct GenericArray[T: AnyRegType]:
    ...

    @staticmethod
    fn splat(count: Int, value: T) -> Self:
        # Create a new array with count instances of the given value
```

Here, `Self` is equivalent to writing `GenericArray[T]`. That is, you can call
the `splat()` method like this:

```python
GenericArray[Float64].splat(8, 0)
```

The method returns an instance of `GenericArray[Float64]`.

### Case study: the SIMD type

For a real-world example of a parameterized type, let's look at the 
`SIMD` type from Mojo's standard library.

Single instruction, multiple data (SIMD) is a parallel processing technology built into many modern CPUs,
GPUs, and custom accelerators. SIMD allows you to perform a single operation on
multiple pieces of data at once. For example, if you want to take the square 
root of each element in an array, you can use SIMD to parallelize the work. 

Processors implement SIMD using low-level vector registers in hardware that hold
multiple instances of a scalar data type. In order to use the SIMD instructions
on these processors, the data must be shaped into the proper SIMD width
(data type) and length (vector size). Processors may support 512-bit or
longer SIMD vectors, and support many data types from 8-bit integers to 64-bit 
floating point numbers, so it's not practical to define all of the possible SIMD
variations. 

Mojo's `SIMD` type (defined as a struct)
exposes the common SIMD operations through its methods, and makes the SIMD data type
and size values parametric. This allows you to directly map your data to the 
SIMD vectors on any hardware.

Here's a cut-down (non-functional) version of Mojo's `SIMD` type definition:

```python
struct SIMD[type: DType, size: Int]:
    var value: … # Some low-level MLIR stuff here

    # Create a new SIMD from a number of scalars
    fn __init__(inout self, *elems: SIMD[type, 1]):  ...

    # Fill a SIMD with a duplicated scalar value.
    @staticmethod
    fn splat(x: SIMD[type, 1]) -> SIMD[type, size]: ...

    # Cast the elements of the SIMD to a different elt type.
    fn casttarget: DType -> SIMD[target, size]: ...

    # Many standard operators are supported.
    fn __add__(self, rhs: Self) -> Self: ...
```

So you can create and use a SIMD vector like this:


```python
var vector = SIMDDType.int16, 4
vector = vector * vector
for i in range(4):
    print(vector[i], sep=" ", end="")
```

    1  4  9  16  

As you can see, a simple arithmetic operator like `*` applied to a pair of 
`SIMD` vector operates on the corresponding elements in each vector.

Defining each SIMD variant with parameters is great for code reuse because the
`SIMD` type can express all the different vector variants statically, instead of
requiring the language to pre-define every variant.

Because `SIMD` is a parameterized type, the `self` argument in its functions
carries those parameters—the full type name is `SIMD[type, size]`. Although
it's valid to write this out (as shown in the return type of `splat()`), this
can be verbose, so we recommend using the `Self` type (from
PEP673) like the `__add__` example does.

## Overloading on parameters

Functions and methods can be overloaded on their parameter signatures. The
overload resolution logic filters for candidates according to the following
rules, in order of precedence:

1) Candidates with the minimal number of implicit conversions (in both arguments
and parameters).
2) Candidates without variadic arguments.
3) Candidates without variadic parameters.
4) Candidates with the shortest parameter signature.
5) Non-`@staticmethod` candidates (over `@staticmethod` ones, if available). 

If there is more than one candidate after applying these rules, the overload
resolution fails. For example:


```python
@register_passable("trivial")
struct MyInt:
    """A type that is implicitly convertible to `Int`."""
    var value: Int

    @always_inline("nodebug")
    fn __init__(_a: Int) -> Self:
        return Self {value: _a}

fn foo[x: MyInt, a: Int]():
    print("foo[x: MyInt, a: Int]()")

fn foo[x: MyInt, y: MyInt]():
    print("foo[x: MyInt, y: MyInt]()")

fn bara: Int:
    print("bara: Int")

fn bara: Int:
    print("bara: Int")

fn bar*a: Int:
    print("bar*a: Int")

fn parameter_overloads[a: Int, b: Int, x: MyInt]():
    # `foo[x: MyInt, a: Int]()` is called because it requires no implicit
    # conversions, whereas `foo[x: MyInt, y: MyInt]()` requires one.
    foo[x, a]()

    # `bara: Int` is called because it does not have variadic
    # arguments or parameters.
    bara

    # `bar*a: Int` is called because it has variadic parameters.
    bara, a, a

parameter_overloads[1, 2, MyInt(3)]()

struct MyStruct:
    fn __init__(inout self):
        pass

    fn foo(inout self):
        print("calling instance menthod")

    @staticmethod
    fn foo():
        print("calling static method")

fn test_static_overload():
    var a = MyStruct()
    # `foo(inout self)` takes precedence over a static method.
    a.foo()
```

    foo[x: MyInt, a: Int]()
    bara: Int
    bar*a: Int
    

## Using parameterized types and functions

You can instantiate parametric types and functions by passing values to the
parameters in square brackets. For example, for the `SIMD` type above, `type`
specifies the data type and `size` specifies the length of the SIMD vector (it
must be a power of 2):


```python
# Make a vector of 4 floats.
var small_vec = SIMDDType.float32, 4

# Make a big vector containing 1.0 in float16 format.
var big_vec = SIMD[DType.float16, 32].splat(1.0)

# Do some math and convert the elements to float32.
var bigger_vec = (big_vec+big_vec).cast[DType.float32]()

# You can write types out explicitly if you want of course.
var bigger_vec2 : SIMD[DType.float32, 32] = bigger_vec

print('small_vec type:', small_vec.element_type, 'length:', len(small_vec))
print('bigger_vec2 type:', bigger_vec2.element_type, 'length:', len(bigger_vec2))
```

    small_vec type: float32 length: 4
    bigger_vec2 type: float32 length: 32
    

Note that the `cast()` method also needs a parameter to specify the type you
want from the cast (the method definition above expects a `target` parametric
value). Thus, just as the `SIMD` struct is a generic type definition, the
`cast()` method is a generic method definition that gets instantiated at
compile-time instead of runtime, based on the parameter value.

The code above shows the use of concrete types (that is, it
instantiates `SIMD` using known type values), but the major power of parameters
comes from the ability to define parametric algorithms and types (code that
uses the parameter values). For example, here's how to define a parametric
algorithm with `SIMD` that is type- and width-agnostic:


```python
from math import sqrt

fn rsqrtdt: DType, width: Int -> SIMD[dt, width]:
    return 1 / sqrt(x)

var v = SIMDDType.float16, 4
print(rsqrt(v))
```

    [0.154296875, 0.154296875, 0.154296875, 0.154296875]
    

Notice that the `x` argument is actually a `SIMD` type based on the function
parameters. The runtime program can use the value of the parameters, because the
parameters are resolved at compile-time before they are needed by the runtime
program (but compile-time parameter expressions cannot use runtime values).

The Mojo compiler is also smart about type inference with parameters. Note
that the above function is able to call the parametric
[`sqrt[]()`](https://docs.modular.com/mojo/stdlib/math/math.html#sqrt) function
without specifying the parameters—the compiler infers its parameters based on
the parametric `x` value passed into it, as if you
wrote `sqrtdt, width` explicitly. Also note that `rsqrt()` chose to
name its second parameter `width` even though the `SIMD` type names it
`size`, and there is no problem.

## Optional parameters and keyword parameters

Just as you can specify optional
arguments in function signatures,
you can also define an optional _parameter_ by giving it a default value.

You can also pass parameters by keyword, just like you can use 
keyword arguments.
For a function or struct with multiple optional parameters, using keywords
allows you to pass only the parameters you want to specify, regardless of
their position in the function signature. 

For example, here's a function with two parameters, each with a default value:


```python
fn speak[a: Int = 3, msg: StringLiteral = "woof"]():
    print(msg, a)

fn use_defaults() raises:
    speak()             # prints 'woof 3'
    speak[5]()          # prints 'woof 5'
    speak[7, "meow"]()  # prints 'meow 7'
    speak[msg="baaa"]() # prints 'baaa 3'
```

Recall that when a parametric function is called, Mojo can infer the parameter values.
That is, it can use the parameter values attached to an argument value (see the `sqrt[]()`
example above). If the parametric function also has a default value defined,
then the inferred parameter type takes precedence.

For example, in the following code, we update the parametric `speak[]()` function
to take an argument with a parametric type. Although the function has a default
parameter value for `a`, Mojo instead uses the inferred `a` parameter value
from the `bar` argument (as written, the default `a` value can never be used,
but this is just for demonstration purposes):


```python
@value
struct Bar[v: Int]:
    pass

fn fooa: Int = 3, msg: StringLiteral = "woof":
    print(msg, a)

fn use_inferred():
    foo(Bar[9]())  # prints 'woof 9'
```

As mentioned above, you can also use optional parameters and keyword 
parameters in a struct:


```python
struct KwParamStruct[greeting: String = "Hello", name: String = "🔥mojo🔥"]:
    fn __init__(inout self):
        print(greeting, name)

fn use_kw_params():
    var a = KwParamStruct[]()                 # prints 'Hello 🔥mojo🔥'
    var b = KwParamStruct[name="World"]()     # prints 'Hello World'
    var c = KwParamStruct[greeting="Hola"]()  # prints 'Hola 🔥mojo🔥'
```



Mojo supports positional-only and keyword-only parameters, following the same
rules as positional-only and keyword-only
arguments.



## Variadic parameters

Mojo also supports variadic parameters, similar to 
Variadic arguments:


```python
struct MyTensor[*dimensions: Int]:
    pass
```

Variadic parameters have some limitations that variadic arguments don't have:

- Only variadic parameters of register-passable types are supported currently.

- The parameters aren't automatically projected into a `VariadicList`, so you
  need to construct the list explicitly:


```python
fn sum_params[*values: Int]() -> Int:
    alias list = VariadicList(values)
    var sum = 0
    for v in list:
        sum += v
    return sum
```

Variadic keyword parameters (for example, `**kwparams`) are
not supported yet.

## Parameter expressions are just Mojo code

A parameter expression is any code expression (such as `a+b`) that occurs where
a parameter is expected. Parameter expressions support operators and function
calls, just like runtime code, and all parameter types use the same type
system as the runtime program (such as `Int` and `DType`).

Because parameter expressions use the same grammar and types as runtime
Mojo code, you can use many 
"dependent type" features. For
example, you might want to define a helper function to concatenate two SIMD
vectors:


```python
fn concat[ty: DType, len1: Int, len2: Int](
        lhs: SIMD[ty, len1], rhs: SIMD[ty, len2]) -> SIMD[ty, len1+len2]:

    var result = SIMD[ty, len1 + len2]()
    for i in range(len1):
        result[i] = SIMDty, 1
    for j in range(len2):
        result[len1 + j] = SIMDty, 1
    return result

var a = SIMDDType.float32, 2
var x = concatDType.float32, 2, 2

print('result type:', x.element_type, 'length:', len(x))
```

    result type: float32 length: 4
    

Note that the resulting length is the sum of the input vector lengths, and this is expressed with a simple `+` operation. 

### Powerful compile-time programming

While simple expressions are useful, sometimes you want to write imperative
compile-time logic with control flow. You can even do compile-time recursion.
For instance, here is an example "tree reduction" algorithm that sums all
elements of a vector recursively into a scalar:


```python
fn slice[ty: DType, new_size: Int, size: Int](
        x: SIMD[ty, size], offset: Int) -> SIMD[ty, new_size]:
    var result = SIMD[ty, new_size]()
    for i in range(new_size):
        result[i] = SIMDty, 1
    return result

fn reduce_addty: DType, size: Int -> Int:
    @parameter
    if size == 1:
        return x[0].to_int()
    elif size == 2:
        return x[0].to_int() + x[1].to_int()

    # Extract the top/bottom halves, add them, sum the elements.
    alias half_size = size // 2
    var lhs = slicety, half_size, size
    var rhs = slicety, half_size, size
    return reduce_addty, half_size

var x = SIMDDType.index, 4
print(x)
print("Elements sum:", reduce_add(x))
```

    [1, 2, 3, 4]
    Elements sum: 10
    

This makes use of the `@parameter` decorator to create a parametric if condition, which is an `if` statement that
runs at compile-time. It requires that its condition be a valid parameter
expression, and ensures that only the live branch of the `if` statement is
compiled into the program.

## Mojo types are just parameter expressions

While we've shown how you can use parameter expressions within types, type
annotations can themselves be arbitrary expressions (just like in Python).
Types in Mojo have a special metatype type, allowing type-parametric algorithms
and functions to be defined. 

For example, we can create a simplified `Array` that supports arbitrary types of
elements (via the `AnyRegType` parameter):


```python
struct Array[T: AnyRegType]:
    var data: Pointer[T]
    var size: Int

    fn __init__(inout self, size: Int, value: T):
        self.size = size
        self.data = Pointer[T].alloc(self.size)
        for i in range(self.size):
            self.data[i] = value

    fn __getitem__(self, i: Int) -> T:
        return self.data[i]

    fn __del__(owned self):
        self.data.free()

var v = ArrayFloat32
print(v[0], v[1], v[2], v[3])
```

    3.1400001049041748 3.1400001049041748 3.1400001049041748 3.1400001049041748
    

Notice that the `T` parameter is being used as the formal type for the
`value` arguments and the return type of the `__getitem__()` function. 
Parameters allow the `Array` type to provide different APIs based on the
different use-cases. 

There are many other cases that benefit from more advanced use of parameters.
For example, you can execute a closure N times in parallel, feeding in a value
from the context, like this:


```python
fn parallelizefunc: fn (Int) -> None:
    # Not actually parallel: see the 'algorithm' module for real implementation.
    for i in range(num_work_items):
        func(i)
```

Another example where this is important is with variadic generics, where an
algorithm or data structure may need to be defined over a list of heterogeneous
types such as for a tuple. Right now, this is not fully supported in Mojo and 
requires writing some MLIR by hand. In the future, this will be possible in pure
Mojo.

## `alias`: named parameter expressions

It is very common to want to *name* compile-time values. Whereas `var` defines a
runtime value, we need a way to define a
compile-time temporary value. For this, Mojo uses an `alias` declaration. 

For example, the `DType` struct 
implements a simple enum using aliases for the enumerators like this (the actual
`DType` implementation details vary a bit):

```python
struct DType:
    var value : UI8
    alias invalid = DType(0)
    alias bool = DType(1)
    alias int8 = DType(2)
    alias uint8 = DType(3)
    alias int16 = DType(4)
    alias int16 = DType(5)
    ...
    alias float32 = DType(15)
```

This allows clients to use `DType.float32` as a parameter expression (which also
works as a runtime value) naturally. Note that this is invoking the
runtime constructor for `DType` at compile-time.

Types are another common use for aliases. Because types are compile-time
expressions, it is handy to be able to do things like this:


```python
alias Float16 = SIMD[DType.float16, 1]
alias UInt8 = SIMD[DType.uint8, 1]

var x : Float16   # Float16 works like a "typedef"
```

Like `var` variables, aliases obey scope, and you can use local aliases within
functions as you'd expect.

## Fully-bound, partially-bound, and unbound types

A parametric type with its parameters specified is said to be _fully-bound_. 
That is, all of its parameters are bound to values. As mentioned before, you can
only instantiate a fully-bound type (sometimes called a _concrete type_).

However, parametric types can be _unbound_ or _partially bound_ in some
contexts. For example, you can alias a partially-bound type to create a new type
that requires fewer parameters:



```python
alias Bytes = SIMD[DType.uint8, _]
var b = Bytes[8]()
```

Here, `Bytes` is a type alias for a `SIMD` vector of bytes. The underscore `_`
in the parameter list indicates that the second parameter, `width`, is unbound.
You specify the `width` parameter later, when you use `Bytes`.

For example, given the following type:


```python
struct MyType[s: String, i: Int, i2: Int, b: Bool = True]:
    pass
```

It can appear in code in the following forms:

- _Fully bound_, with all of its parameters specified:

  ```python
  MyType["Hello", 3, 4, True]
  ```

- _Partially bound_, with *some but not all* of its parameters specified:

  ```python
  MyType["Hola", _, _, True]
  ```

- _Unbound_, with no parameters specified:

  ```python
  MyType[_, _, _, _]
  ```

You can also use the star-underscore expression `*_` to unbind an arbitrary
number of positional parameters at the end of a parameter
list.

```python
# These two types are equivalent
MyType["Hello", *_]
MyType["Hello", _, _, _]
```

When a parameter is explicitly unbound with the `_` or `*_` expression, you
**must** specify a value for that parameter to use the type. Any default value
from the original type declaration is ignored.

Partially-bound and unbound parametric types can be used in some contexts where
the missing (unbound) parameters will be supplied later—such as in 
aliases and
automatically parameterized functions.

### Omitted parameters

Mojo also supports an alternate format for unbound parameter where the parameter
is simply omitted from the expression:

```python
# Partially bound
MyType["Hi there"]
# Unbound
MyType
```

This format differs from the explicit unbinding syntax described above in that
the default values for omitted parameters are bound immediately. For example, 
the following expressions are equivalent: 

```python
MyType["Hi there"]
# equivalent to
MyType["Hi there", _, _, True] # Uses the default value for `b`
```

 

This format is currently supported for backwards compatibility. We intend to
deprecate this format in the future in favor of the explicit unbinding syntax.




## Automatic parameterization of functions

Mojo  supports "automatic" parameterization of functions. If a function 
argument type is a 
partially-bound or unbound type,
the unbound parameters are automatically added as input parameters on the 
function. This is easier to understand with an example:


```python
fn print_params(vec: SIMD[*_]):
    print(vec.type)
    print(vec.size)

var v = SIMDDType.float64, 4
print_params(v)
```

    float64
    4
    

In the above example, the `print_params` function is automatically 
parameterized. The `vec` argument takes an argument of type `SIMD[*_]`. This is
an [unbound parameterized
type](#fully-bound-partially-bound-and-unbound-types)—that is, it doesn't
specify any parameter values for the type. Mojo treats the unbound parameters
on `vec` as implicit parameters on the function. This is roughly equivalent to
the following code, which includes _explicit_ input parameters:


```python
fn print_paramst: DType, s: Int:
    print(vec.type)
    print(vec.size)
```


When you call `print_params()` you must pass it a concrete instance of the 
`SIMD`  type—that is, one with all of its parameters specified, like 
`SIMD[DType.float64, 4]`. The Mojo compiler _infers_ the parameter 
values from the input argument.

With a manually parameterized function, you can access the input parameters by
name (for example, `t` and `s` in the previous example). For an
automatically parameterized function, you can access the parameters as
attributes on the argument (for example, `vec.type`). 

This ability to access a type's input parameters is not specific to 
automatically parameterized functions, you can use it anywhere. You can access 
the input parameters of a parameterized type as attributes on the type itself:


```python
fn on_type():
    print(SIMD[DType.float32, 2].size) # prints 2
```

Or as attributes on an _instance_ of the type:


```python
fn on_instance():
    var x = SIMDDType.int32, 2
    print(x.type) # prints int32
```

You can even use this syntax in the function's signature to define a 
function's arguments and return type based on an argument's parameters.
For example, if you want your function to take two SIMD vectors with the same
type and size, you can write code like this:


```python
fn interleave(v1: SIMD, v2: __type_of(v1)) -> SIMD[v1.type, v1.size*2]:
    var result = SIMD[v1.type, v1.size*2]()
    for i in range(v1.size):
        result[i*2] = SIMDv1.type, 1
        result[i*2+1] = SIMDv1.type, 1
    return result

var a = SIMDDType.int16, 4
var b = SIMDDType.int16, 4
var c = interleave(a, b)
print(c)
```

    [1, 0, 2, 0, 3, 0, 4, 0]
    

As shown in the example, you can use the magic  `__type_of(x)` call if you just want to match the type of an argument. In this case, it's more convenient and compact that writing the equivalent `SIMD[v1.type, v1.size]`.

### Automatic parameterization with partially-bound types

Mojo also supports automatic parameterization: with [partially-bound
parameterized types](#fully-bound-partially-bound-and-unbound-types) (that is,
types with some but not all of the parameters specified).

For example, suppose we have a `Fudge` struct with three parameters:


```python
@value
struct Fudgesugar: Int, cream: Int, chocolate: Int = 7:
    fn __str__(self) -> String:
        var values = StaticIntTuple3
        return str("Fudge") + values
```

We can write a function that takes a `Fudge` argument with just one bound 
parameter (it's _partially bound_):


```python
fn eat(f: Fudge[5, *_]):
    print("Ate " + str(f))
```

The `eat()` function takes a `Fudge` struct with the first parameter (`sugar`)
bound to the value 5. The second and third parameters, `cream` and `chocolate`
are.

The unbound `cream` and `chocolate` parameters become implicit input parameters
on the `eat` function. In practice, this is roughly equivalent to writing:


```python
fn eatcr: Int, ch: Int:
    print("Ate " + str(f))
```

In both cases, we can call the function by passing in an instance with the
`cream` and `chocolate` parameters bound:


```python
eat(Fudge[5, 5, 7]())
eat(Fudge[5, 8, 9]())
```

    Ate Fudge(5, 5, 7)
    Ate Fudge(5, 8, 9)
    

If you try to pass in an argument with a `sugar` value other than 5,
compilation fails, because it doesn't match the argument type:

```python
eat(Fudge[12, 5, 7]()) 
# ERROR: invalid call to 'eat': argument #0 cannot be converted from 'Fudge[12, 5, 7]' to 'Fudge[5, 5, 7]'
```


You can also explicitly unbind individual parameters. This gives you 
more freedom in specifying unbound parameters.

For example, you might want to let the user specify values for `sugar` and 
`chocolate`, and leave `cream` constant. To do this, replace each unbound
parameter value with a single underscore (`_`):


```python
fn devour(f: Fudge[_, 6, _]):
    print(str("Devoured ") + str(f))
```

Again, the unbound parameters (`sugar` and `chocolate`) are added as implicit
input parameters on the function. This version is roughly equivalent to the
following code, where these two values are explicitly bound to the input 
parameters, `su` and `ch`:


```python
fn devoursu: Int, ch: Int:
        print(str("Devoured ") + str(f))
```

You can also specify parameters by keyword, or mix positional and keyword
parameters, so the following function is roughly equivalent to the previous one:
the first parameter, `sugar` is explicitly unbound with the underscore character.
The `chocolate` parameter is unbound using the keyword syntax, `chocolate=_`. 
And `cream` is explicitly bound to the value 6:



```python
fn devour(f: Fudge[_, chocolate=_, cream=6]):
    print(str("Devoured ") + str(f))
```

All three versions of the `devour()` function work with the following calls:


```python
devour(Fudge[3, 6, 9]())
devour(Fudge[4, 6, 8]())
```

    Devoured Fudge(3, 6, 9)
    Devoured Fudge(4, 6, 8)
    

### Legacy syntax (omitted parameters)

You can also specify an unbound or partially-bound type by omitting parameters: 
for example:


```python
fn nibble(f: Fudge[5]):
    print("Ate " + str(f))
```

Here, `Fudge[5]` works like `Fudge[5, *_]` **except** in the handling of parameters with default values. Instead of discarding the default value of
`chocolate`, `Fudge[5]` binds the default value immediately, making it equivalent to: `Fudge[5, _, 7]`.


This means that the following code won't compile with the previous definition for `nibble()` function, since it doesn't use the default value for `chocolate`:

```python
nibble(Fudge[5, 5, 9]())
# ERROR: invalid call to 'eat': argument #0 cannot be converted from 'Fudge[5, 5, 9]' to 'Fudge[5, 5, 7]'
```

 TODO

Support for omitting unbound parameters will eventually be deprecated in
favor of explicitly unbound parameters using `_` and `*_`. 



