---
title: Mojo December 2022
date: 2022-12-26
---

## Week of 2022-12-26

- 📢 You can now call functions in a parameter context! Calling a function in
  a parameter context will evaluate the function at compile time. The result
  can then be used as parameter values. For example,

  ```mojo
  fn fma(x: Int, y: Int, z: Int) -> Int:
      return a + b * c

  fn parameter_call():
      alias nelts = fma(32, 2, 16)
      var x: SIMD[f32, nelts]
  ```

- You can now disable printing of types in an `__mlir_attr` substitution by
  using unary `+` expression.

- 📢 `let` declarations are now supported in functions. `let` declarations are
  local run-time constant values, which are always rvalues. They complement
  'var' decls (which are mutable lvalues) and are the normal thing to use in
  most cases. They also generate less IR and are always in SSA form when
  initialized.

  We will want to extend this to support 'let' decls in structs at some point
  and support lazy initialized 'let' declarations (using dataflow analysis) but
  that isn't supported yet.

- 📚 Add the `NDBuffer` struct.

- Happy new year.

## Week of 2022-12-19

- 📚 Start of the Standard library:
  1. Added Integer and SIMD structs to bootstrap the standard library.
  2. Added very basic buffer data structure.

- We have basic support for parsing parameter results in function calls! Result
  parameters are an important Mojo metaprogramming feature. They allow functions
  to return compile-time constants.

  ```mojo
  fn get_preferred_simdwidthof[() -> nelts: Int]():
      return[2]

  fn vectorized_function():
      get_preferred_simdwidthof[() -> nelts]()
      var x: SIMD[f32, nelts]
  ```

- Types can now be used as parameters of `!kgen.mlirtype` in many more cases.

- MLIR operations with zero results don't need to specify `_type: []` anymore.

- We support parsing triple quoted strings, for writing docstrings for your
  functions and structs!

- A new `__mlir_type[a,b,c]` syntax is available for substituting into MLIR
  types and attributes is available, and the old placeholder approach is
  removed. This approach has a few advantages beyond what placeholders do:

  1. It's simpler.
  2. It doesn't form the intermediate result with placeholders, which
     gets rejected by MLIR's semantic analysis, e.g. the complex case
     couldn't be expressed before.
  3. It provides a simple way to break long attrs/types across multiple
     lines.

- We now support an `@evaluator` decorator on functions for KGEN evaluators.
  This enables specifying user-defined interface evaluators when performing
  search during compilation.

- 📢 `import` syntax is now supported!

  This handles packaging imported modules into file ops, enables effective
  isolation from the other decls. "import" into the desired context is just
  aliasing decls, with the proper symbols references handle automatically during
  IR generation. As a starting point, this doesn't handle any notion of packages
  (as those haven't been sketched out enough).

- 📢 Reversed binary operators (like `__radd__`) are now looked up and used if
  the forward version (like `__add__`) doesn't work for some reason.

- 📢 Implicit conversions are now generally available, e.g. in assign
  statements, variable initializers etc. There are probably a few more places
  they should work, but we can start eliminating all the extraneous explicit
  casts from literals now.

- Happy Holidays

## Week of 2022-12-12

- 📢 Function overloading now works. Call resolution filters candidate list
  according to the actual parameter and value argument specified at the site of
  the call, diagnosing an error if none of the candidates are viable or if
  multiple are viable and ambiguous. We also consider implicit conversions in
  overload look:

  ```mojo
  fn foo(x: Int): pass
  fn foo(x: F64): pass

  foo(Int(1)) # resolves to the first overload
  foo(1.0)    # resolves to the second overload
  foo(1)      # error: both candidates viable with 1 implicit conversion!
  ```

- The short circuiting binary `and` and `or` expressions are now supported.

- Unary operator processing is a lot more robust, now handling the `not`
  expression and `~x` on Bool.

- 📢 The compiler now generates debug information for use with GDB/LLDB that
  describes variables and functions.

- The first version of the Mojo Visual Studio Code extension has been released!
  It supports syntax highlighting for Mojo files.

- The first version of the `Bool` type has landed in the new Mojo standard
  library!

- 📢 Implicit conversions are now supported in return statements.

## Week of 2022-12-05

- "Discard" patterns are now supported, e.g. `_ = foo()`

- We now support implicit conversions in function call arguments, e.g.
  converting an `index` value to `Int` automatically. This eliminates a bunch
  of casts, e.g. the need to say F32(1.0) everywhere.

   This is limited for a few reasons that will be improved later:
   1. We don't support overloading, so lots of types aren't convertible
      from all the things they should be, e.g. you can't pass "1" to
      something that expects F32, because F32 can't be created from index.
   2. This doesn't "check to see if we can invoke `__new__`" it force applies
      it on a mismatch, which leads to poor QoI.
   3. This doesn't fix things that need radd.
