---
title: Mojo November 2022
date: 2022-11-28
---

## Week of 2022-11-28

- 📢 We support the `True` and `False` keywords as expressions.

- 📢 A new `alias` declaration is supported which allows defining local
  parameter values. This will eventually subsume type aliases and other
  things as it gets built out.

- 📢 We now have end-to-end execution of Mojo files using the `kgen` tool!
  Functions exported with `@export` can be executed.

- 📢 We have try-except-else and `raise` statements and implicit error
  propagation! The error semantics are that `def` can raise by default, but `fn`
  must explicitly declare raising with a `@raises` decorator. Stub out basic
  `Error` type.

- The `&` sigil for by-ref arguments is now specified after the identifier.
  Postfix works better for ref and move operators on the expression
  side because it chains an mentally associates correctly:
  `thing.method().result^`. We don't do that yet, but align param
  decl syntax to it so that things won't be odd looking when we do.
  In practice this looks like:

  ```mojo
  def mutate_argument(a&: index):
      a = 25
  ```

## Week of 2022-11-21

- 📢 The magic `index` type is gone. Long live `__mlir_type.index`.

- Implement parameter substitution into parametric `__mlir_type` decls. This
  allows us to define parametric opaque MLIR types with exposed parameters using
  a new "placeholder" attribute. This allows us to expose the power of the KGEN
  type parametric system directly into Mojo.

- 📢 Fully-parametric custom types can now be defined and work in Mojo, bringing
  together a lot of the recent work. We can write the SIMD type directly as a
  wrapper around the KGEN type, for example:

  ```mojo
  struct SIMD[dt: __mlir_type.`!kgen.dtype`, nelts: __mlir_type.index]:
      var value:
        __mlir_type.`!pop.simd<#lit<placeholder index>,
                               #lit<placeholder !kgen.dtype>>`[nelts, dt]

      fn __add__(self, rhs: SIMD[dt, nelts]) -> SIMD[dt, nelts]:
          return __mlir_op.`pop.add`(self.value, rhs.value)
  ```

## Week of 2022-11-14

- 📢 Implement a magic `__mlir_type` declaration that can be used to access any
  MLIR type. E.g. `__mlir_type.f64`.

- 📢 Add an `fn` declaration. These are like `def` declarations, but are more
  strict in a few ways: they require type annotations on arguments, don't allow
  implicit variable declarations in their body, and make their arguments rvalues
  instead of lvalues.

- Implemented Swift-style backtick identifiers, which are useful for code
  migration where names may collide with new keywords.

- 📢 A new `__include` directive has been added that performs source-level
  textual includes. This is temporary until we have an `import` model.

- Implement IR generation for arithmetic operators like `+` and `*` in terms
  of the `__add__` and `__mul__` methods.

- 📢 Added support for `break` and `continue` statements, as well as early
  returns inside loops and conditionals!

- 📢 Implemented augmented assignment operators, like `+=` and `@=`.

- 📢 Mojo now has access to generating any MLIR operations (without regions)
  with a new `__mlir_op` magic declaration. We can start to build out the
  language's builtin types with this:

  ```mojo
  struct Int:
      var value: __mlir_type.index

      fn __add__(self, rhs: Int) -> Int:
          return __mlir_op.`index.add`(self.value, rhs.value)
  ```

  Attributes can be attached to the declaration with subscript `[]` syntax,
  and an explicit result type can be specified with a special `_type` attribute
  if it cannot be inferred. Attributes can be accessed via the `__mlir_attr`
  magic decl:

  ```mojo
  __mlir_op.`index.cmp`[
      _type: __mlir_type.i1,
      pred: __mlir_attr.`#index<cmp_predicate slt>`
  ](lhs, rhs)
  ```

- Improved diagnostics emissions with ranges! Now errors highlight the whole
  section of code and not just the first character.

## Week of 2022-11-07

- Implemented the `@interface` and `@implements` decorators, which provide
  access to KGEN generator interfaces. A function marked as an `@interface`
  has no body, but it can be implemented by multiple other functions.

  ```mojo
  @interface
  def add(lhs: index, rhs: index):

  @implements(add)
  def normal_add(lhs: index, rhs: index) -> index:
      return lhs + rhs

  @implements(add)
  def slow_add(lhs: index, rhs: index) -> index:
      wait(1000)
      return normal_add(lhs, rhs)
  ```

- 📢 Support for static struct methods and initializer syntax has been added.
  Initializing a struct with `Foo()` calls an implicitly static `__new__`
  method. This method should be used instead of `__init__` inside structs.

  ```mojo
  struct Foo:
      var value: index

      def __new__() -> Foo:
          var result: Foo
          result.value = Foo.return_a_number() # static method!
          return result

      @staticmethod
      def return_a_number() -> index:
          return 42
  ```

- 📢 Full by-ref argument support. It's now possible to define in-place
  operators like `__iadd__` and functions like `swap(x, y)` correctly.

- 📢 Implemented support for field extract from rvalues, like `x.value` where
  `x` is not an lvalue (`var` declaration or by-ref function argument).
