---
title: Mojo October 2022
date: 2022-10-31
---

## Week of 2022-10-31

- Revised `return` handling so that a return statement with no expression is
  syntax sugar for `return None`. This enables early exits in functions that
  implicitly return `None` to be cleaner:

  ```mojo
  def just_return():
      return
  ```

- Added support for parsing more expressions: if-else, bitwise operators,
  shift operators, comparisons, floor division, remainder, and matmul.

- 📢 The type of the `self` argument can now be omitted on member methods.

## Week of 2022-10-24

- Added parser support for right-associativity and unary ops, like the power
  operator `a ** b ** c` and negation operator `-a`.

- Add support for `&expr` in Mojo, which allows denoting a by-ref argument in
  functions. This is required because the `self` type of a struct method is
  implicitly a pointer.

- Implemented support for parametric function declarations, such as:

  ```mojo
  struct SIMD[dt: DType, width: index]:
      fn struct_method(self: &SIMD[dt, width]):
          pass

  def fancy_add[dt: DType, width: index](
      lhs: SIMD[dt, width], rhs: SIMD[dt, width]) -> index:
    return width
  ```

## Week of 2022-10-17

- Added explicit variable declarations with `var`, for declaring variables both
  inside functions and structs, with support for type references. Added `index`
  as a temporary built-in type.

  ```mojo
  def foo(lhs: index, rhs: index) -> index:
      var result: index = lhs + rhs
      return result
  ```

- Implemented support for parsing struct declarations and references to type
  declarations in functions! In `def`, the type can be omitted to signal an
  object type.

  ```mojo
  struct Foo:
      var member: index

  def bar(x: Foo, obj) -> index:
      return x.member
  ```

- Implemented parser support for `if` statements and `while` loops!

  ```mojo
  def if_stmt(c: index, a: index, b: index) -> index:
      var result: index = 0
      if c:
          result = a
      else:
          result = b
      return result

  def while_stmt(init: index):
      while init > 1:
          init = init - 1
  ```

- Significantly improved error emission and handling, allowing the parser to
  emit multiple errors while parsing a file.

## Week of 2022-10-10

- Added support for parsing integer, float, and string literals.

- Implemented parser support for function input parameters and results. You can
  now write parametric functions like,

  ```mojo
  def foo[param: Int](arg: Int) -> Int:
      result = param + arg
      return result
  ```

## Week of 2022-10-03

- Added some basic parser scaffolding and initial parser productions, including
  trivial expressions and assignment parser productions.
- Implemented basic scope handling and function IR generation, with support for
  forward declarations. Simple functions like,

  ```mojo
  def foo(x: Int):
  ```

  Now parse! But all argument types are hard-coded to the MLIR `index` type.

- Added IR emission for simple arithmetic expressions on builtin types, like
  `x + y`.
