---
title: Mojo April 2023
date: 2023-04-24
---

## Week of 2023-04-24

- 📢 The default behavior of nested functions has been changed. Mojo nested
  functions that capture are by default are non-parametric, runtime closures,
  meaning that:

  ```mojo
  def foo(x):
      # This:
      def bar(y): return x * y
      # Is the same as:
      let bar = lambda y: x * y
  ```

  These closures cannot have input or result parameters, because they are always
  materialized as runtime values. Values captured in the closure (`x` in the
  above example), are captured by copy: values with copy constructors cannot be
  copied and captures are immutable in the closure.

  Nested functions that don't capture anything are by default "parametric"
  closures: they can have parameters and they can be used as parameter values.
  To restore the previous behavior for capturing closures, "parametric,
  capture-by-unsafe-reference closures", tag the nested function with the
  `@parameter` decorator.

- 📢 Mojo now has full support for "runtime" closures: nested functions that
  capture state materialized as runtime values. This includes taking the address
  of functions, indirect calls, and passing closures around through function
  arguments. Note that capture-by-reference is still unsafe!

  You can also take references to member functions with instances of that class
  using `foo.member_function`, which creates a closure with `foo` bound to the
  `self` argument.

- 📢 Mojo now supports Python style `with` statements and context managers.

  These things are very helpful for implementing things like our
  trace region support and things like Runtime support.

  A context manager in Mojo implements three methods:

  ```mojo
  fn __enter__(self) -> T:
  fn __exit__(self):
  fn __exit__(self, err: Error) -> Bool:
  ```

  The first is invoked when the context is entered, and returns a
  value that may optionally be bound to a target for use in the with
  body. If the with block exits normally, the second method is
  invoked to clean it up. If an error is raised, the third method
  is invoked with the Error value. If that method returns true, the
  error is considered handled, if it returns false, the error is
  re-thrown so propagation continues out of the 'with' block.

- 📢 Mojo functions now support variable scopes! Explicit `var` and `let`
  declarations inside functions can shadow declarations from higher "scopes",
  where a scope is defined as any new indentation block. In addition, the
  `for` loop iteration variable is now scoped to the loop body, so it is
  finally possible to write

  ```mojo
  for i in range(1): pass
  for i in range(2): pass
  ```

- 📢 Mojo now supports an `@value` decorator on structs to reduce boilerplate
  and encourage best practices in value semantics. The `@value` decorator looks
  to see the struct has a fieldwise initializer (which has arguments for each
  field of the struct), a `__copyinit__` method, and a `__moveinit__` method,
  and synthesizes the missing ones if possible. For example, if you write:

  ```mojo
  @value
  struct MyPet:
    var name: String
    var age: Int
  ```

  The `@value` decorator will synthesize the following members for you:

  ```mojo
  fn __init__(inout self, owned name: String, age: Int):
      self.name = name^
      self.age = age
  fn __copyinit__(inout self, existing: Self):
      self.name = existing.name
      self.age = existing.age
  fn __moveinit__(inout self, owned existing: Self):
      self.name = existing.name^
      self.age = existing.age
  ```

  This decorator can greatly reduce the boilerplate needed to define common
  aggregates, and gives you best practices in ownership management
  automatically. The `@value` decorator can be used with types that need custom
  copy constructors (your definition wins). We can explore having the decorator
  take arguments to further customize its behavior in the future.

- 📚 Memcpy and memcmp now consistently use count as the byte count.

- 📚 Add a variadic string join on strings.

- 📚 Introduce a `reduce_bit_count` method to count the number of 1 across all
  elements in a SIMD vector.

- 📚 Optimize the `pow` function if the exponent is integral.

- 📚 Add a `len` function which dispatches to `__len__` across the different
  structs that support it.

## Week of 2023-04-17

- 📢 Error messages have been significantly improved, thanks to prettier
  printing for Mojo types in diagnostics.

- 📢 Variadic values can now be indexed directly without wrapping them in a
  `VariadicList`!

- 📢 `let` declarations in a function can now be lazily initialized, and `var`
  declarations that are never mutated get a warning suggesting they be converted
  to a `let` declaration. Lazy initialization allows more flexible patterns of
  initialization than requiring the initializer be inline, e.g.:

  ```mojo
  let x: Int
  if cond:
      x = foo()
  else:
      x = bar()
  use(x)
  ```

- 📢 Functions defined with `def` now return `object` by default, instead of
  `None`. This means you can return values (convertible to `object`) inside
  `def` functions without specifying a return type.

- 📢 The `@raises` decorator has been removed. Raising `fn` should be declared
  by specifying `raises` after the function argument list. The rationale is that
  `raises` is part of the type system, instead of a function modifier.

- 📢 The `BoolLiteral` type has been removed. Mojo now emits `True` and `False`
  directly as `Bool`.

- 📢 Syntax for function types has been added. You can now write function types
  with `fn(Int) -> String` or `async def(&String, *Int) -> None`. No more
  writing `!kgen.signature` types by hand!

- 📢 Float literals are not emitted as `FloatLiteral` instead of an MLIR `f64`
  type!

- 📢 Automatic destructors are now supported by Mojo types, currently spelled
  `fn __del___(owned self):` (the extra underscore will be dropped shortly).
  These destructors work like Python object destructors and similar to C++
  destructors, with the major difference being that they run "as soon as
  possible" after the last use of a value. This means they are not suitable
  for use in C++-style RAII patterns (use the `with` statement for that, which
  is currently unsupported).

  These should be generally reliable for both memory-only and register-passable
  types, with the caveat that closures are known to *not* capture values
  correctly. Be very careful with interesting types in the vicinity of a
  closure!

- A new (extremely dangerous!) builtin function is available for low-level
  ownership muckery. The `__get_address_as_owned_value(x)` builtin takes a
  low-level address value (of `!kgen.pointer` type) and returns an `owned` value
  for the memory that is pointed to. This value is assumed live at the
  invocation of the builtin, but is "owned" so it needs to be consumed by the
  caller, otherwise it will be automatically destroyed. This is an effective
  way to do a "placement delete" on a pointer.

  ```mojo
  # "Placement delete": destroy the initialized object begin pointed to.
  _ = __get_address_as_owned_value(somePointer.value)

  # Result value can be consumed by anything that takes it as an 'owned'
  # argument as well.
  consume(__get_address_as_owned_value(somePointer.value))
  ```

- Another magic operator, named `__get_address_as_uninit_lvalue(x)` joins
  the magic LValue operator family. This operator projects a pointer to
  an LValue like `__get_address_as_lvalue(x)`. The difference is that
  `__get_address_as_uninit_lvalue(x)` tells the compiler that the pointee is
  uninitialized on entry and initialized on exit, which means that you can use
  it as a "placement new" in C++ sense. `__get_address_as_lvalue(x)` tells the
  compiler that the pointee is initialized already, so reassigning over it will
  run the destructor.

  ```mojo
  # "*Re*placement new": destroy the existing SomeHeavy value in the memory,
  # then initialize a new value into the slot.
  __get_address_as_lvalue(somePointer.value) = SomeHeavy(4, 5)

  # Ok to use an lvalue, convert to borrow etc.
  use(__get_address_as_lvalue(somePointer.value))

  # "Placement new": Initialize a new value into uninitialied memory.
  __get_address_as_uninit_lvalue(somePointer.value) = SomeHeavy(4, 5)

  # Error, cannot read from uninitialized memory.
  use(__get_address_as_uninit_lvalue(somePointer.value))
  ```

  Note that `__get_address_as_lvalue` assumes that there is already a value at
  the specified address, so the assignment above will run the `SomeHeavy`
  destructor (if any) before reassigning over the value.

- 📢 Implement full support for `__moveinit__` (aka move constructors)

  This implements the ability for memory-only types to define two different
  types of move ctors if they'd like:

  1. `fn __moveinit__(inout self, owned existing: Self)`: Traditional Rust
     style moving constructors that shuffles data around while taking
     ownership of the source binding.
  2. `fn __moveinit__(inout self, inout existing: Self):`: C++ style "stealing"
     move constructors that can be used to take from an arbitrary LValue.

  This gives us great expressive capability (better than Rust/C++/Swift)
  and composes naturally into our lifetime tracking and value
  categorization system.

- The `__call__` method of a callable type has been relaxed to take `self` by
  borrow, allow non-copyable callees to be called.

- Implicit conversions are now invoked in `raise` statements properly, allowing
  converting strings to `Error` type.

- Automatic destructors are turned on for `__del__` instead of `__del___`.

- 📚 Add the builtin FloatLiteral type.

- 📚 Add integral `floordiv` and `mod` for the SIMD type that handle negative
  values.

- 📚 Add an F64 to String converter.

- 📚 Make the `print` function take variadic inputs.

## Week of 2023-04-10

- 📢 Introduce consume operator `x^`

  This introduces the postfix consume operator, which produces an RValue given
  a lifetime tracked object (and, someday, a movable LValue).

- Mojo now automatically synthesizes empty destructor methods for certain types
  when needed.

- The `object` type has been built out into a fully-dynamic type, with dynamic
  function dispatch, with full error handling support.

  ```mojo
  def foo(a) -> object:
      return (a + 3.45) < [1, 2, 3] # raises a TypeError
  ```

- 📢 The `@always_inline` decorator is no longer required for passing capturing
  closures as parameters, for both the functions themselves as functions with
  capturing closures in their parameters. These functions are still inlined but
  it is an implementation detail of capturing parameter closures. Mojo now
  distinguishes between capturing and non-capturing closures. Nested functions
  are capturing by default and can be made non-capturing with the
  `@noncapturing` decorator. A top-level function can be passed as a capturing
  closure by marking it with the `@closure` decorator.

- 📢 Support for list literals has been added. List literals `[1, 2, 3]`
  generate a variadic heterogeneous list type.

- Variadics have been extended to work with memory-primary types.

- Slice syntax is now fully-supported with a new builtin `slice` object, added
  to the compiler builtins. Slice indexing with `a[1:2:3]` now emits calls to
  `__setitem__` and `__getitem__` with a slice object.

- Call syntax has been wired up to `__call__`. You can now `f()` on custom
  types!

- Closures are now explicitly typed as capturing or non-capturing. If a
  function intends to accept a capturing closure, it must specify the
  `capturing` function effect.

- 📚 Add a `Tile2D` function to enable generic `2D` tiling optimizations.

- 📚 Add the `slice` struct to enable getting/setting spans of elements via
  `getitem`/`setitem`.

- 📚 Add syntax sugar to autotuning for both specifying the autotuned values,
  searching, and declaring the evaluation function.

## Week of 2023-04-03

- The `AnyType` and `NoneType` aliases were added and auto-imported in all
  files.

- 📢 The Mojo VS Code extension has been improved with docstring validation. It
  will now warn when a function's docstring has a wrong argument name, for
  example.

- 📢 A new built-in literal type `TupleLiteral` was added in `_CompilerBuiltin`.
  It represents literal tuple values such as `(1, 2.0)` or `()`.

- 📢 The `Int` type has been moved to a new `Builtin` module and is
  auto-imported in all code. The type of integer literals has been changed from
  the MLIR `index` type to the `Int` type.

- Mojo now has a powerful flow-sensitive uninitialized variable checker. This
  means that you need to initialize values before using them, even if you
  overwrite all subcomponents. This enables the compiler to reason about the
  true lifetime of values, which is an important stepping stone to getting
  automatic value destruction in place.

- 📢 Call syntax support has been added. Now you can directly call an object
  that implements the `__call__` method, like `foo(5)`.

- 📢 The name for copy constructors got renamed from `__copy__` to
  `__copyinit__`. Furthermore, non-`@register_passable` types now implement
  it like they do an init method where you fill in a by-reference self, for
  example:

  ```mojo
  fn __copyinit__(inout self, existing: Self):
      self.first = existing.first
      self.second = existing.second
  ```

  This makes copy construction work more similarly to initialization, and
  still keeps copies `x = y` distinct from initialization `x = T(y)`.

- 📢 Initializers for memory-primary types are now required to be in the form
  `__init__(inout self, ...):` with a None result type, but for register primary
  types, it remains in the form `__init__(...) -> Self:`. The `T{}` initializer
  syntax has been removed for memory-primary types.

- Mojo String literals now emit a builtin `StringLiteral` type! One less MLIR
  type to worry about.

- New `__getattr__` and `__setattr__` dunder methods were added. Mojo calls
  these methods on a type when attempting member lookup of a non-static member.
  This allows writing dynamic objects like `x.foo()` where `foo` is not a member
  of `x`.

- Early destructor support has been added. Types can now define a special
  destructor method `__del___` (note three underscores). This is an early
  feature and it is still being built out. There are many caveats, bugs,
  and missing pieces. Stay tuned!

- 📚 Integer division and mod have been corrected for rounding in the presence
  of negative numbers.

- 📚 Add scalar types (UI8, SI32, F32, F64, etc.) which are aliases to
  `SIMD[1, type]`.
