---
title: Mojo January 2023
date: 2023-01-30
---

## Week of 2023-01-30

- A basic Mojo language server has been added to the VS Code extension, which
  parses your code as you write it, and provides warnings, errors, and fix-it
  suggestions!

- 💯 The Mojo standard library is now implicitly imported by default.

- The coroutine lowering support was reworked and a new `Coroutine[T]` type was
  implemented. Now, the result of a call to an async function MUST be wrapped in
  a `Coroutine[T]`, or else memory will leak. In the future, when Mojo supports
  destructors and library types as literal types, the results of async function
  calls will automatically wrapped in a `Coroutine[T]`. But today, it must be
  done manually. This type implements all the expected hooks, such as
  `__await__`, and `get()` to retrieve the result. Typical usage:

  ```mojo
  async fn add_three(a: Int, b: Int, c: Int) -> Int:
      return a + b + c

  async fn call_it():
      let task: Coroutine[Int] = add_three(1, 2, 3)
      print(await task)
  ```

- ⭐️ We now diagnose unused expression values at statement context in `fn`
  declarations (but not in `def`s). This catches bugs with unused values, e.g.
  when you forget the parens to call a function.

- 📢 An `@always_inline("nodebug")` function decorator can be used on functions
  that need to be force inlined, but when they should not have debug info in
  the result. This should be used on methods like `Int.__add__` which should
  be treated as builtin.

- 📢 The `@export` decorator now supports an explicit symbol name to export to,
  for example:

  ```mojo
  @export("baz") # exported as 'baz'
  fn some_mojo_fn_name():
  ```

- 📢 🚧 Subscript syntax is now wired up to the `__getitem__` dunder method.

  This allows type authors to implement the `__getitem__` method to enable
  values to be subscripted. This is an extended version of the Python semantics
  (given we support overloading) that allows you to define N indices instead of
  a single version that takes a tuple (also convenient because we don't have
  tuples yet).

  Note that this has a very, very important limitation: subscripts are NOT
  wired up to `__setitem__` yet. This means that you can read values with
  `.. = v[i]` but you cannot store to them with `v[i] = ..`. For this, please
  continue to call `__setitem__` directly.

- 📢 Function calls support parameter inference.

  For calls to functions that have an insufficient number of parameters
  specified at the callsite, we can now infer them from the argument list. We
  do this by matching up the parallel type structure to infer what the
  parameters must be.

  Note that this works left to right in the parameter list, applying explicitly
  specified parameters before trying to infer new ones. This is similar to how
  C++ does things, which means that you may want to reorder the list of
  parameters with this in mind. For example, a `dyn_cast`-like function will be
  more elegant when implemented as:

  `fn dyn_cast[DstType: type, SrcType: type](src: SrcType) -> DstType:`

  Than with the `SrcType`/`DstType` parameters flipped around.

- 📚 Add the growable Dynamic vector struct.

## Week of 2023-01-23

- Inplace operations like `+=`/`__iadd__` may now take `self` by-val if they
  want to, instead of requiring it to be by-ref.
- ⭐️ Inplace operations are no longer allowed to return a non-None value. The
  corresponding syntax is a statement, not an expression.

- A new `TaskGroup` type was added to the standard library. This type can be
  used to schedule multiple tasks on a multi-threaded workqueue to be executed
  in parallel. An async function can `await` all the tasks at once with the
  taskgroup.

- 📢 We now support for loops! A type that defines an `__iter__` method that
  returns a type that defines `__next__` and `__len__` methods is eligible to
  be used in the statement `for el in X()`. Control flow exits the loop when
  the length is zero.

  This means things like this now work:

  ```mojo
  for item in range(start, end, step):
      print(item)
  ```

- Result parameters now have names. This is useful for referring to result
  parameters in the return types of a function:

  ```mojo
  fn return_simd[() -> nelts: Int]() -> SIMD[f32, nelts]:
  ```

- 📢 We now support homogeneous variadics in value argument lists, using the
  standard Python `fn thing(*args: Int):` syntax! Variadics also have support
  in parameter lists:

  ```mojo
  fn variadic_params_and_args[*a: Int](*b: Int):
      print(a[0])
      print(b[1])
  ```

- 📚 Add the range struct to enable `for ... range(...)` loops.

- 📚 Introduce the unroll generator to allow one to unroll loops via a library
  function.

## Week of 2023-01-16

- 📢 Struct field references are now supported in parameter context, so you
  can use `someInt.value` to get the underlying MLIR thing out of it. This
  should allow using first-class types in parameters more widely.
- 📢 We now support "pretty" initialization syntax for structs, e.g.:

  ```mojo
  struct Int:
      var value: __mlir_type.index
      fn __new__(value: __mlir_type.index) -> Int:
          return Int {value: value}
  ```

  This eliminates the need to directly use the MLIR `lit.struct.create` op in
  struct initializers. This syntax may change in the future when ownership
  comes in, because we will be able to support the standard `__init__` model
  then.
- 📢 It is now possible to attach regions to `__mlir_op` operations. This is
  done with a hack that allows an optional `_region` attribute that lists
  references to the region bodies (max 1 region right now due to lack of list
  `[]` literal).
- Nested functions now parse, e.g.:

  ```mojo
  fn foo():
      fn bar():
          pass
      bar()
  ```

- Python-style `async` functions should now work and the `await` expression
  prefix is now supported. This provides the joy of async/await syntactic
  sugar when working with asynchronous functions. This is still somewhat
  dangerous to use because we don't have proper memory ownership support yet.

- String literals are now supported.

- Return processing is now handled by a dataflow pass inside the compiler, so
  it is possible to return early out of if statements.

- The parser now supports generating 'fixit' hints on diagnostics, and uses
  them when a dictionary literal uses a colon instead of equal, e.g.:

  ```log
  x.mojo:8:48: error: expected ':' in subscript slice, not '='
      return __mlir_op.`lit.struct.create`[value = 42]()
                                                 ^
                                                 :
  ```

- 📚 Add reduction methods which operate on buffers.

- 📚 Add more math functions like sigmoid, sqrt, rsqrt, etc.

- 📚 Add partial load / store which enable loads and stores that are predicated
  on a condition.

## Week of 2023-01-09

- The `/` and `*` markers in function signatures are now parsed and their
  invariants are checked. We do not yet support keyword arguments yet though,
  so they aren't very useful.
- Functions now support a new `@nodebug_inline` decorator.
  (Historical note: this was later replaced with `@alwaysinline("nodebug")`).

  Many of the things at the bottom level of the Mojo stack are trivial
  zero-abstraction wrappers around MLIR things, for example, the `+`
  operator on Int or the `__bool__` method on Bool itself. These operators
  need to be force inlined even at -O0, but they have some additional things
  that we need to wrestle with:

  1. In no case would a user actually want to step into the `__bool__` method on
     Bool or the + method on Int. This would be terrible debugger QoI for
     unless you're debugging Int itself. We need something like
     `__always_inline__, __nodebug__` attributes that clang uses in headers
     like xmmintrin.h.

  2. Similarly, these "operators" should be treated by users as primitives:
     they don't want to know about MLIR or internal implementation details of
     Int.

  3. These trivial zero abstraction things should be eliminated early in the
     compiler pipeline so they don't slow down the compiler, bloating out the
     call graph with trivial leaves. Such thing slows down the elaborator,
     interferes with basic MLIR things like fold(), bloats out the IR, or
     bloats out generated debug info.

  4. In a parameter context, we want some of these things to get inlined so
     they can be simplified by the attribute logic and play more nicely with
     canonical types. This is just a nice to have thing those of us who have
     to stare at generated IR.

  The solution to this is a new `@nodebug_inline` decorator. This decorator
  causes the parser to force-inline the callee instead of generating a call to
  it. While doing so, it gives the operations the location of the call itself
  (that's the "nodebug" part) and strips out let decls that were part of the
  internal implementation details.

  This is a super-power-user-feature intended for those building the standard
  library itself, so it is intentionally limited in power and scope: It can
  only be used on small functions, it doesn't support regions, by-ref, throws,
  async, etc.

- Separately, we now support an `@alwaysInline` decorator on functions. This
  is a general decorator that works on any function, and indicates that the
  function must be inlined. Unlike `@nodebug_inline`, this kind of inlining is
  performed later in the compilation pipeline.

- The `__include` hack has been removed now that we have proper import support.

- `__mlir_op` can now get address of l-value:

  You can use magic `(((x)))` syntax in __mlir_op that forces the `x`
  expression to be an lvalue, and yields its address. This provides an escape
  hatch (isolated off in `__mlir_op` land) that allows unsafe access to lvalue
  addresses.

- We now support `__rlshift__` and `__rtruediv__`.

- 📢 The parser now resolves scoped alias references. This allows us to support
  things like `SomeType.someAlias`, forward substituting the value. This
  unblocks use of aliases in types like `DType`. We'd like to eventually
  preserve the reference in the AST, but this unblocks library development.

- 📚 Add a `now` function and `Benchmark` struct to enable timing and
  benchmarking.

- 📚 Move more of the computation in `NDBuffer` from runtime to compile time if
  possible (e.g. when the dimensions are known at compile time).

## Week of 2023-01-02

- 📚 Added the `print` function which works on Integers and SIMD values.

- The frontend now has a new diagnostic subsystem used by the `kgen` tool (but
  not by `kgen-translate` for tests) that supports source ranges on diagnostics.
  Before we'd emit an error like:

  ```log
  x.mojo:13:3: error: invalid call to 'callee': in argument #0, value of type '$F32::F32' cannot be converted to expected type '$int::Int'
    callee(1.0+F32(2.0))
    ^
  x.lit:4:1: note: function declared here
  fn callee(a: Int):
  ^
  ```

  now we produce:

  ```log
  x.mojo:13:3: error: invalid call to 'callee': in argument #0, value of type '$F32::F32' cannot be converted to expected type '$int::Int'
    callee(1.0+F32(2.0))
    ^      ~~~~~~~~~~~~
  x.lit:4:1: note: function declared here
  fn callee(a: Int):
  ^
  ```

- 📢 Parameter results are now supported in a proper way. They are now forward
  declared with an alias declaration and then bound in a call with an arrow,
  e.g.:

  ```mojo
  alias a: __mlir_type.index
  alias b: __mlir_type.index
  idx_result_params[xyz * 2 -> a, b]()
  ```

- Various minor issues with implicit conversions are fixed. For instances,
  implicit conversions are now supported in parameter binding contexts and
  `alias` declarations with explicit types.
- Doc strings are allowed on functions and structs, but they are currently
  discarded by the parser.

- 📚 Add a `print` method!!!

- 📚 Demonstrate a naive matmul in Mojo.

- 📚 Initial work on functions that depend on types (e.g. FPUtils, nan, inf,
  etc.)

- 📚 Allow one to query hardware properties such as simd_width, os, etc. via
  TargetInfo at compile time.
