---
title: Mojo July 2023
date: 2023-07-26
---

## 2023-07-26

### ⭐️ New

- Types that define both `__getitem__` and `__setitem__` (i.e. where
  sub-scripting instances creates computed LValues) can now be indexed
  in parameter expressions.

- Unroll decorator for loops with constant bounds and steps:
  - `@unroll`: Fully unroll a loop.
  - `@unroll(n)`: Unroll a loop by factor of n, where `n` is a positive integer.
  - Unroll decorator requires loop bounds and iteration step to be
  compiler time constant value, otherwise unrolling will fail with
  compilation error. This also doesn't make loop induction variable a parameter.

  ```mojo
  # Fully unroll the loop.
  @unroll
  for i in range(5):
      print(i)

  # Unroll the loop by a factor of 4 (with remainder iterations of 2).
  @unroll(4)
  for i in range(10):
      print(i)
  ```

- The Mojo REPL now prints the values of variables defined in the REPL. There is
  full support for scalars and structs. Non-scalar SIMD vectors are not
  supported at this time.

### 🛠️ Fixed

- [Issue #437](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/437) - Range can now
  be instantiated with a PythonObject.

- [Issue #288](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/288) - Python strings
  can now be safely copied.

## 2023-07-20

### ⭐️ New

- Mojo now includes a `Limits` module, which contains functions to get the max
  and min values representable by a type, as requested in [Issue
  #51](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/51). The following functions
  moved from `Math` to `Limits`: `inf()`, `neginf()`, `isinf()`, `isfinite()`.

- Mojo decorators are now distinguished between "signature" and "body"
  decorators and are ordered. Signature decorators, like `@register_passable`
  and `@parameter`, modify the type of declaration before the body is parsed.
  Body decorators, like `@value`, modify the body of declaration after it is
  fully parsed. Due to ordering, a signature decorator cannot be applied after
  a body decorator. That means the following is now invalid:

  ```mojo
  @register_passable # error: cannot apply signature decorator after a body one!
  @value
  struct Foo:
      pass
  ```

- Global variables can now be exported in Mojo compiled archives, using the
  `@export` decorator. Exported global variables are public symbols in compiled
  archives and use the variable name as its linkage name, by default. A custom
  linkage name can be specified with `@export("new_name")`. This does not affect
  variable names in Mojo code.

- Mojo now supports packages! A Mojo package is defined by placing an
  `__init__.mojo` or `__init__.🔥` within a directory. Other files in the same
  directory form modules within the package (this works exactly like it
  does [in Python](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#packages)).
  Example:

  ```bash
  main.🔥
  my_package/
    __init__.🔥
    module.🔥
    my_other_package/
      __init__.🔥
      stuff.🔥
  ```

  ```mojo
  # main.🔥
  from my_package.module import some_function
  from my_package.my_other_package.stuff import SomeType

  fn main():
      var x: SomeType = some_function()
  ```

- Mojo now supports direct module and package imports! Modules and packages can
  be imported and bound to names. Module and package elements, like functions,
  types, global variables, and other modules, can be accessed using attribute
  references, like `my_module.foo`. Note that modules lack runtime
  representations, meaning module references cannot be instantiated.

  ```mojo
  import builtin.io as io
  import SIMD

  io.print("hello world")
  var x: SIMD.Float32 = 1.2
  ```

### 🦋 Changed

- Reverted the feature from 2023-02-13 that allowed unqualified struct members.
  Use the `Self` keyword to conveniently access struct members with bound
  parameters instead. This was required to fix
  [Issue #260](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/260).

- Updated the RayTracing notebook: added step 5 to create specular lighting for
  more realistic images and step 6 to add a background image.

### 🛠️ Fixed

- [Issue #260](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/260) - Definitions
  inside structs no longer shadow definitions outside of struct definitions.

## 2023-07-12

### ⭐️ New

- Mojo now has support for global variables! This enables `var` and `let`
  declaration at the top-level scope in Mojo files. Global variable initializers
  are run when code modules are loaded by the platform according to the order of
  dependencies between global variables, and their destructors are called in the
  reverse order.

- The Mojo programming manual is now written
  as a Jupyter notebook, and available in its entirety in the Mojo Playground
  (`programming-manual.ipynb`). (Previously, `HelloMojo.ipynb` included most of
  the same material, but it was not up-to-date.)

- As a result, we've also re-written `HelloMojo.ipynb` to be much shorter and
  provide a more gentle first-user experience.

- [`Coroutine` module documentation](/docs/std/builtin/coroutine/) is now
  available. Coroutines form the basis of Mojo's support for asynchronous
  execution. Calls to `async fn`s can be stored into a `Coroutine`, from which
  they can be resumed, awaited upon, and have their results retrieved upon
  completion.

### 🦋 Changed

- `simd_bit_width` in the `TargetInfo` module has been renamed to `simdbitwidth`
  to better align with `simdwidthof`, `bitwidthof`, etc.

### 🛠️ Fixed

- The walrus operator now works in if/while statements without parentheses,
  e.g. `if x := function():`.

- [Issue #428](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/428) - The
  `FloatLiteral` and `SIMD` types now support conversion to `Int` via the
  `to_int` or `__int__` method calls. The behavior matches that of Python, which
  rounds towards zero.

## 2023-07-05

### ⭐️ New

- Tuple expressions now work without parentheses. For example, `a, b = b, a`
  works as you'd expect in Python.
- Chained assignments (e.g. `a = b = 42`) and the walrus operator (e.g.
  `some_function(b := 17)`) are now supported.

### 🦋 Changed

- The `simd_width` and `dtype_simd_width` functions in the
  [`TargetInfo`](/docs/std/sys/info/) module
  have been renamed to `simdwidthof`.

- The `dtype_` prefix has been dropped from `alignof`, `sizeof`, and
  `bitwidthof`. You can now use these functions (e.g. `alignof`) with any
  argument type, including `DType`.

- The `inf`, `neginf`, `nan`, `isinf`, `isfinite`, and `isnan` functions were
  moved from the `Numerics` module to the [`Math`](/docs/std/math/math/)
  module, to better align with Python's library structure.

### 🛠️ Fixed

- [Issue #253](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/253) - Issue
  when accessing a struct member alias without providing parameters.

- [Issue #404](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/404) - The docs now use
  `snake_case` for variable names, which more closely conforms to Python's
  style.

- [Issue #379](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/379) - Tuple
  limitations have been addressed and multiple return values are now supported,
  even without parentheses.

- [Issue #347](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/347) - Tuples no longer
  require parentheses.

- [Issue #320](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/320) - Python objects
  are now traversable via `for` loops.
