---
title: Mojo March 2023
date: 2023-03-27
---

## Week of 2023-03-27

- 📢 Parameter names are no longer load-bearing in function signatures. This
  gives more flexibility in defining higher-order functions, because the
  functions passed as parameters do not need their parameter names to match.

   ```mojo
   # Define a higher-order function...
   fn generator[
      func: __mlir_type[`!kgen.signature<`, Int, `>() -> !kgen.none`]
   ]():
      pass

   # Int parameter is named "foo".
   fn f0[foo: Int]():
      pass

   # Int parameter is named "bar".
   fn f1[bar: Int]():
      pass

   fn main():
      # Both can be used as `func`!
      generator[f0]()
      generator[f1]()
   ```

   Stay tuned for improved function type syntax...

- 📢 Two magic operators, named `__get_lvalue_as_address(x)` and
  `__get_address_as_lvalue` convert stored LValues to and from `!kgen.pointer`
  types (respectively). This is most useful when using the `Pointer[T]`
  library type. The `Pointer(to=lvalue)` method uses the first one
  internally. The second one must currently be used explicitly, and can be
  used to project a pointer to a reference that you can pass around and use
  as a self value, for example:

  ```mojo
  # "Replacement new" SomeHeavy value into the memory pointed to by a
  # Pointer[SomeHeavy].
  __get_address_as_lvalue(somePointer.value) = SomeHeavy(4, 5)
  ```

  Note that `__get_address_as_lvalue` assumes that there is already a value at
  the specified address, so the assignment above will run the `SomeHeavy`
  destructor (if any) before reassigning over the value.

- The `(((x)))` syntax is __mlir_op has been removed in favor of
  `__get_lvalue_as_address` which solves the same problem and is more general.

- 📢 When using a mutable `self` argument to a struct `__init__` method, it
  now must be declared with `&`, like any other mutable method. This clarifies
  the mutation model by making `__init__` consistent with other mutating
  methods.

- 📚 Add variadic string join function.

- 📚 Default initialize values with 0 or null if possible.

- 📚 Add compressed, aligned, and mask store intrinsics.

## Week of 2023-03-20

- Initial `String` type is added to the standard library with some very basic
  methods.

- Add `DimList` to remove the need to use an MLIR list type throughout the
  standard library.

- 📢 The `__clone__` method for copying a value is now named `__copy__` to
  better follow Python term of art.

- 📢 The `__copy__` method now takes its self argument as a "read" value,
  instead of taking it by reference. This makes it easier to write, works for
  `@register_passable` types, and exposes more optimization opportunities to
  the early optimizer and dataflow analysis passes.

  ```mojo
  # Before:
  fn __clone__(inout self) -> Self: ...

  # After:
  fn __copy__(self) -> Self: ...
  ```

- 📢 A new `@register_passable("trivial")` may be applied to structs that
  have no need for a custom `__copy__` or `__del__` method, and whose state is
  only made up of `@register_passable("trivial")` types. This eliminates the
  need to define `__copy__` boilerplate and reduces the amount of IR generated
  by the compiler for trivial types like `Int`.

- You can now write back to attributes of structs that are produced by a
  computed lvalue expression. For example `a[i].x = ..` works when `a[i]`
  is produced with a `__getitem__`/`__setitem__` call. This is implemented by
  performing a read of `a[i]`, updating the temporary, then doing a writeback.

- The remaining hurdles to using non-parametric, `@register_passable` types as
  parameter values have been cleared. Types like `Int` should enjoy full use as
  parameter values.

- Parameter pack inference has been added to function calls. Calls to functions
  with parameter packs can now elide the pack types:

  ```mojo
  fn foo[*Ts: AnyType](*args: *Ts): pass

  foo(1, 1.2, True, "hello")
  ```

  Note that the syntax for parameter packs has been changed as well.

- 📚 Add the runtime string type.

- 📚 Introduce the DimList struct to remove the need to use low-level MLIR
  operations.

## Week of 2023-03-13

- 📢 Initializers for structs now use `__init__` instead of `__new__`,
  following standard practice in Python. You can write them in one of two
  styles, either traditional where you mutate self:

  ```mojo
  fn __init__(self, x: Int):
      self.x = x
  ```

  or as a function that returns an instance:

  ```mojo
  fn __init__(x: Int) -> Self:
      return Self {x: x}
  ```

  Note that `@register_passable` types must use the later style.

- 📢 The default argument convention is now the `borrowed` convention. A
  "read" argument is passed like a C++ `const&` so it doesn't need to
  invoke the copy constructor (aka the `__clone__` method) when passing a value
  to the function. There are two differences from C++ `const&`:

  1. A future borrow checker will make sure there are no mutable
     aliases with an immutable borrow.
  2. `@register_passable` values are passed directly in an SSA register (and
     thus, usually in a machine register) instead of using an extra reference
     wrapper. This is more efficient and is the 'right default' for
     `@register_passable` values like integers and pointers.

  This also paves the way to remove the reference requirement from `__clone__`
  method arguments, which will allow us to fill in more support for them.

- Support for variadic pack arguments has been added to Mojo. You can now
  write heterogeneous variadic packs like:

  ```mojo
  fn foo[*Ts: AnyType](args*: Ts): pass

  foo[Int, F32, String, Bool](1, 1.5, "hello", True)
  ```

- The `owned` argument convention has been added. This argument convention
  indicates that the function takes ownership of the argument and is responsible
  for managing its lifetime.

- The `borrowed` argument convention has been added. This convention signifies
  the callee gets an immutable shared reference to a value in the caller's
  context.

- 📚 Add the `getenv` function to the `OS` module to enable getting environment
  variables.

- 📚 Enable the use of dynamic strides in `NDBuffer`.

## Week of 2023-03-06

- 📢 Support added for using capturing async functions as parameters.

- 📢 Returning result parameters has been moved from `return` statements to a
  new `param_return` statement. This allows returning result parameters from
  throwing functions:

  ```mojo
  @raises
  fn foo[() -> out: Int]():
      param_return[42]
      raise Error()
  ```

  And returning different parameters along `@parameter if` branches:

  ```mojo
  fn bar[in: Bool -> out: Int]():
      @parameter
      if in:
          param_return[1]
      else:
          param_return[2]
  ```

- 📢 Mojo now supports omitting returns at the end of functions when they would
  not reachable. For instance,

  ```mojo
  fn foo(cond: Bool) -> Int:
      if cond:
          return 0
      else:
          return 1

  fn bar() -> Int:
      while True:
          pass
  ```

- String literals now support concatenation, so `"hello " "world"` is treated
  the same as `"hello world"`.

- Empty bodies on functions, structs, and control flow statements are no longer
  allowed. Please use `pass` in them to explicitly mark that they are empty,
  just like in Python.

- 📢 Structs in Mojo now default to living in memory instead of being passed
  around in registers. This is the right default for generality (large
  structures, structures whose pointer identity matters, etc) and is a key
  technology that enables the borrow model. For simple types like `Int` and
  `SIMD`, they can be marked as `@register_passable`.

  Note that memory-only types currently have some limitations: they cannot be
  used in generic algorithms that take and return a `!mlirtype` argument, and
  they cannot be used in parameter expressions. Because of this, a lot of
  types have to be marked `@register_passable` just to work around the
  limitations. We expect to enable these use-cases over time.

- 📢 Mojo now supports computed lvalues, which means you can finally assign to
  subscript expressions instead of having to call `__setitem__` explicitly.

  Some details on this: Mojo allows you to define multiple `__setitem__`
  overloads, but will pick the one that matches your `__getitem__` type if
  present. It allows you to pass computed lvalues into inout arguments by
  introducing a temporary copy of the value in question.

- Mojo now has much better support for using register-primary struct types in
  parameter expressions and as the types of parameter values. This will allow
  migration of many standard library types away from using bare MLIR types like
  `__mlir_type.index` and towards using `Int`. This moves us towards getting rid
  of MLIR types everywhere and makes struct types first-class citizens in the
  parameter system.

- 📚 Add a `sort` function.

- 📚 Add non-temporal store to enable cache bypass.
