---
title: Mojo August 2023
date: 2023-08-24
---

## 2023-08-24

- Fixed issue where the `with expr as x` statement within `fn` behaved
  as if it were in a `def`, binding `x` with function scope instead of using
  lexical scope.

### ⭐️ New

- Major refactoring of the standard library to enable packaging and better
  import ergonomics:
  - The packages are built as binaries to improve startup speed.
  - Package and module names are now lowercase to align with the Python style.
  - Modules have been moved to better reflect the purpose of the underlying
    functions (e.g. `Pointer` is now within the `unsafe` module in the `memory`
    package).
  - The following modules are now included as built-ins:
    `SIMD`, `DType`, `IO`, `Object`, and `String`.
    This means it's no longer necessary to explicitly import these modules.
    Instead, these modules will be implicitly imported for the user. Private
    methods within the module are still accessible using the
    `builtin.module_name._private_method` import syntax.
  - New `math` package has been added to contain the `bit`, `math`, `numerics`,
    and `polynomial` modules. The contents of the `math.math` module are
    re-exported into the `math` package.

- Mojo now supports using memory-only types in parameter expressions and as
  function or type parameters:

  ```mojo
  @value
  struct IntPair:
      var first: Int
      var second: Int

  fn add_them[value: IntPair]() -> Int:
      return value.first + value.second

  fn main():
      print(add_them[IntPair(1, 2)]()) # prints '3'
  ```

- In addition, Mojo supports evaluating code that uses heap-allocated memory at
  compile-time and materializing compile-time values with heap-allocated memory
  into dynamic values:

  ```mojo
  fn fillVector(lowerBound: Int, upperBound: Int, step: Int) -> DynamicVector[Int]:
      var result = DynamicVector[Int]()
      for i in range(lowerBound, upperBound, step):
          result.push_back(i)
      return result

  fn main():
      alias values = fillVector(5, 23, 7)
      for i in range(0, values.__len__()):
          print(values[i]) # prints '5', '12', and then '19'
  ```

### 🦋 Changed

- `def main():`, without the explicit `None` type, can now be used to define
  the entry point to a Mojo program.

- The `assert_param` function has been renamed to `constrained` and is now
  a built-in function.

- The `print` function now works on `Complex` values.

### 🛠️ Fixed

- Fixed issues with print formatting for `DType.uint16` and `DType.int16`.
- [Issue #499](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/499) - Two new
  `rotate_right` and `rotate_left` functions have been added to the SIMD module.
- [Issue #429](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/429) - You can now
  construct a `Bool` from a `SIMD` type whose element-type is `DType.bool`.
- [Issue #350](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/350) - Confusing Matrix
  implementation
- [Issue #349](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/349) - Missing load_tr
  in struct Matrix
- [Issue #501](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/501) - Missing syntax
  error messages in Python expressions.

## 2023-08-09

### 🦋 Changed

- The `ref` and `mutref` identifiers are now treated as keywords, which means
  they cannot be used as variable, attribute, or function names. These keywords
  are used by the "lifetimes" features, which is still in development. We can
  consider renaming these (as well as other related keywords) when the
  development work gels, support is enabled in public Mojo builds, and when we
  have experience using them.

- The argument handling in `def` functions has changed: previously, they had
  special behavior that involved mutable copies in the callee. Now, we have a
  simple rule, which is that `def` argument default to the `owned` convention
  (`fn` arguments still default to the `borrowed` convention).

  This change is mostly an internal cleanup and simplification of the compiler
  and argument model, but does enable one niche use-case: you can now pass
  non-copyable types to `def` arguments by transferring ownership of a value
  into the `def` call. Before, that would not be possible because the copy was
  made on the callee side, not the caller's side. This also allows the explicit
  use of the `borrowed` keyword with a `def` that wants to opt-in to that
  behavior.

## 2023-08-03

### ⭐️ New

- A new `Tensor` type has
been introduced. This tensor type manages its own data (unlike `NDBuffer` and
`Buffer` which are just views). Therefore, the tensor type performs its own
allocation and free. Here is a simple example of using the tensor type to
represent an RGB image and convert it to grayscale:

  ```mojo
  from tensor import Tensor, TensorShape
  from utils.index import Index
  from random import rand

  let height = 256
  let width = 256
  let channels = 3

  # Create the tensor of dimensions height, width, channels and fill with
  # random value.
  let image = rand[DType.float32](height, width, channels)

  # Declare the grayscale image.
  var gray_scale_image = Tensor[DType.float32](height, width)

  # Perform the RGB to grayscale transform.
  for y in range(height):
      for x in range(width):
          let r = image[y, x, 0]
          let g = image[y, x, 1]
          let b = image[y, x, 2]
          gray_scale_image[Index(y, x)] = 0.299 * r + 0.587 * g + 0.114 * b
  ```

### 🛠️ Fixed

- [Issue #53](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/53) - `Int` now
  implements true division with the `/` operator. Similar to Python, this
  returns a 64-bit floating point number. The corresponding in-place operator,
  `/=`, has the same semantics as `//=`.
