---
title: Mojo February 2023
date: 2023-02-27
---

## Week of 2023-02-27

- 📢 The `@interface`, `@implements`, and `@evaluator` trio of decorators have
  been removed, replaced by the `@parameter if` and `@adaptive` features.

- 📢 Parameter inference can now infer the type of variadic lists.

- 📢 Memory primary types are now supported in function results. A result slot
  is allocated in the caller, and the callee writes the result of the function
  into that slow. This is more efficient for large types that don't fit into
  registers neatly! And initializers for memory-primary types now initialize
  the value in-place, instead of emitting a copy!

- Support for `let` decls of memory primary types has been implemented. These
  are constant, ready-only values of memory primary types but which are
  allocated on the function stack.

- Overload conversion resolution and parameter inference has been improved:

  1. Inference now works with `let` decls in some scenarios that weren't
     working before.
  2. Parameter bindings can now infer types into parameter expressions. This
     helps resolve higher-order functions in parameter expressions.

- 📚 Optimize floor, ceil, and ldexp on X86 hardware.

- 📚 Implement the log math function.

## Week of 2023-02-20

- 📢 A new `@__memory_primary` struct decorator has been introduced. Memory
  primary types must always have an address. For instance, they are always
  stack-allocated when declared in a function and their values are passed into
  function calls by address instead of copy. This is in contract with register
  primary types that may not have an address, and which are passed by value
  in function calls. Memory-primary fields are not allowed inside
  register-primary structs, because struct elements are stored in-line.

- 📢 A new `_CompilerBuiltin` module was added. This module defines core types
  and functions of the language that are referenced by the parser, and hence, is
  auto-imported by all other modules. For example new types for literal values
  like the boolean True/False will be included in `_CompilerBuiltin`.

- 📢 A special `__adaptive_set` property can be accessed on a function reference
  marked as `@adaptive`. The property returns the adaptive overload set of that
  function. The return type is a `!kgen.param_list`. This feature is useful to
  implement a generic `evaluate` function in the standard library.

- 📢 A new built-in literal type `BoolLiteral` was added in `_CompilerBuiltin`.
  It represents the literal boolean values `True` and `False`. This is the first
  Mojo literal to be emitted as a standard library type!

- 📚 Add the prefetch intrinsic to enable HW prefetching a cache line.

- 📚 Add the `InlinedFixedVector`, which is optimized for small vectors and
  stores values on both the stack and the heap.

## Week of 2023-02-13

- Unqualified lookups of struct members apply contextual parameters. This means
  for instance that you can refer to static methods without binding the
  struct parameters.

  ```mojo
  struct Foo[x: Int]:
      @staticmethod
      bar(): pass

      foo(self):
          bar()         # implicitly binds to Foo[x].bar()
          Foo[2].bar()  # explicitly bind to another parameter
  ```

- 📢 A new `Self` type refers to the enclosing type with all parameters bound
  to their current values. This is useful when working with complex parametric
  types, e.g.:

  ```mojo
  struct MyArray[size: Int, element_type: type]:
     fn __new__() -> Self:
         return Self {...}
  ```

  which is a lot nicer than having to say `MyArray[size, element_type]` over
  and over again.

- 📢 Mojo now supports an `@adaptive` decorator. This decorator will supersede
  interfaces, and it represents an overloaded function that is allowed to
  resolve to multiple valid candidates. In that case, the call is emitted as a
  fork, resulting in multiple function candidates to search over.

  ```mojo
  @adaptive
  fn sort(arr: ArraySlice[Int]):
      bubble_sort(arr)

  @adaptive
  fn sort(arr: ArraySlice[Int]):
      merge_sort(arr)

  fn concat_and_sort(lhs: ArraySlice[Int], rhs: ArraySlice[Int]):
      let arr = lhs + rhs
      sort(arr) # this forks compilation, creating two instances
                # of the surrounding function
  ```

- 📢 Mojo now requires that types implement the `__clone__` special member in
  order to copy them. This allows the safe definition of non-copyable types
  like Atomic. Note that Mojo still doesn't implement destructors, and (due to
  the absence of non-mutable references) it doesn't actually invoke the
  `__clone__` member when copying a let value. As such, this forces to you as
  a Mojo user to write maximal boilerplate without getting much value out of it.

  In the future, we will reduce the boilerplate with decorators, and we will
  actually start using it. This will take some time to build out though.

- 📢 A special `__mlir_region` statement was added to provide stronger
  invariants around defining MLIR operation regions in Mojo. It similar syntax
  to function declarations, except it there are no results and no input
  conventions.

- 📚 Implement the log math function.

- 📚 Improve the DType struct to enable compile-time equality checks.

- 📚 Add the Complex struct class.

## Week of 2023-02-06

- 📢 The `if` statement now supports a `@parameter` decorator, which requires
  its condition to be a parameter expression, but which only emits the 'True'
  side of the condition to the binary, providing a "static if" functionality.
  This should eliminate many uses of `@interface` that are just used to provide
  different constraint on the implementations.

- 📢 `fn main():` is now automatically exported and directly runnable by the
  command-line `mojo` tool. This is a stop-gap solution to enable script-like
  use cases until we have more of the language built out.

- 🪦 The `@nodebug_inline` feature has been removed, please use
  `@alwaysinline("nodebug")` for methods that must be inlined and that we don't
  want to step into.

- 📢 Python chained comparisons, ex. `a < b < c`, are now supported in Mojo.

- 📢 Functions can now be defined with default argument values, such as
  `def f(x: Int, y: Int = 5):`. The default argument value is used when callers
  do not provide a value for that argument: `f(3)`, for example, uses the
  default argument value of `y = 5`.

- Unused coroutine results are now nicely diagnosed as "missing await" warnings.

- 📚 Introduce a vectorized reduction operations to the SIMD type.
