---
title: Mojo v0.25.6
version: 0.25.6.0
date: 2025-09-22
---

:::caution Version scheme change!

This release is technically a version *downgrade* because we've added a `0.` at
the beginning: `0.25.6`. This is necessary because we started publishing `mojo`
packages on pypi.org and it's important that we don't publish a package greater
than 1.0 yet.

Shortly after the 0.25.6 release, we "yanked" all Conda packages that are
greater than 1.0 so they won't be installed unless you explicitly specify the
version. So you'll still get the latest version like this:

```sh
pixi add mojo
```

And if you want an older version, just specify the version like this:

```sh
pixi add "mojo==25.5"
```

However, if you're installing `mojo` as a Python package with `pip` or
`uv`, the oldest version available is `0.25.6`.

:::

## Highlights {#25-6-highlights}

- You can now **`pip install mojo`**!

  Although we still love the environment reliability of [Pixi](/pixi),
  installing Mojo with `pip` or `uv` further enhances our interoperability
  with the Python ecosystem, making it easier to [extend your Python code with
  Mojo](/docs/manual/python/mojo-from-python). For more information, see the
  [Mojo install guide](/install/).

- We've released a new version of the Mojo extension for Visual Studio Code that
  now works with **both** the stable and nightly Mojo releases. You can install
  the Mojo extension from either the
  [Visual Studio Code Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=modular-mojotools.vscode-mojo)
  or the
  [Open VSX Registry](https://open-vsx.org/extension/modular-mojotools/vscode-mojo).

  The new extension replaces the old stable version, so if you have the stable
  version installed, you can simply update it to receive the new version. If you
  have the nightly version of the extension installed, you should uninstall it
  and install the regular (non-nightly) version.

- New [Mojo vision](/docs/vision/) doc explains our motivations and design
  decisions for the Mojo language.

- New [Mojo roadmap](/docs/roadmap/) provides a high-level roadmap for the
  language across multiple phases.

- Mojo now has support for default trait methods, allowing traits to provide
  reusable behavior without requiring every conforming struct to re-implement
  it. Default methods are automatically inherited by conforming structs unless
  explicitly overridden. See
  [Default method implementations](/docs/manual/traits/#default-method-implementations)
  in the Mojo Manual for more information.

- Added support for many consumer GPUs, including initial support for Apple
  silicon GPUs. See [GPU support](#25-6-gpu-support) for details.

- The way copying is modeled in Mojo has been overhauled. The `Copyable` trait
  has been updated to represent a type that can be *explicitly* copied (using a
  `copy()` method), and a new `ImplicitlyCopyable` "marker" trait can be used to
  *opt-in* to making a type implicitly copyable as well. **This swaps the
  default behavior from being implicitly copyable to being only explicitly
  copyable.** Several standard library traits, types, and functions now require
  now require explicit `Copyable` instead of `ImplicitlyCopyable`. See
  [Standard library changes](#25-6-standard-library-changes) for more
  information.

- Uncaught exceptions or segmentation faults in Mojo programs can now
  generate stack traces. This is currently only for CPU-based code. To generate
  a fully symbolicated stack trace, set the `MOJO_ENABLE_STACK_TRACE_ON_ERROR`
  environment variable, use `mojo build` with debug info enabled, e.g.
  `-debug-level=line-tables`, and then run the resulting binary.

- Major standard library improvements include:

  - Making the `SIMD` type conform to `Comparable` and `EqualityComparable`,
    which means that you can use `SIMD` values as `Dict` keys, among other
    things. For details, see
    [SIMD and related types](#25-6-simd-and-related-types).

  - A new `Some[Trait]` utility to make it easier to
    declare an argument that conforms to a trait. For details, see
    [Other standard library changes](#25-6-other-standard-library-changes).

  - Several enhancements to how iterators work in Mojo, including a new
    `Iterable` trait. For more information, see
    [Collections and iterators changes](#25-6-collections-and-iterators-changes).

## Language enhancements {#25-6-language-enhancements}

- Mojo now allows the use of keywords in function names (after `def` and `fn`)
  and in attribute references after a `.`. This notably allows the use of the
  `match()` method in regex libraries even though Mojo takes this as a hard
  keyword. Uses in other locations can still use backticks:

  ```mojo
  struct MatchExample:
      fn match(self): # This is ok now.
          pass

  fn test_match(a: MatchExample):
      a.match() # This is ok now.
      a.`match`() # This is still valid.
  ```

- When generating error messages for complex types involving parameter calls,
  the Mojo compiler now prints functions parameter values correctly, eliminating
  a large class of `T != T` errors that happen with GPU layouts.

## Language changes {#25-6-language-changes}

- Methods on structs may now declare their `self` argument with a `deinit`
  argument convention. This argument convention is used for methods like
  `__del__()` and `__moveinit__()` to indicate that they tear down the
  corresponding value without needing its destructor to be run again. Beyond
  these two methods, this convention can be used to declare "named" destructors,
  which are methods that consume and destroy the value without themselves
  running the values destructor. For example, the standard
  [`VariadicPack`](/docs/std/builtin/variadics/VariadicPack/) type has these
  methods:

  ```mojo
  struct VariadicPack[...]:
      # implicit destructor
      fn __del__(deinit self): ...
      # move constructor
      fn __moveinit__(out self, deinit existing: Self): ...
      # custom explicit destructor that destroys "self" by transferring all of
      # the stored elements.
      fn consume_elements[
        elt_handler: fn (idx: Int, var elt: element_type) capturing
    ](deinit self): ...
  ```

  This argument convention is a fairly narrow power-user feature that is
  important to clarify the destruction model and make linear types fit into the
  model better. (A linear type is just a type that has no `__del__()` method,
  but provides a destructor that the user must call explicitly. Linear types are
  a proposed feature that hasn't been fully implemented yet.)

  - The `__del__()` and `__moveinit__()` methods should now take their `self`
    and `existing` arguments as `deinit` instead of either `owned` or `var`.

  - The `__disable_del` keyword and statement has been removed, use `deinit`
    methods instead.

- The Mojo compiler now warns about use of the deprecated `owned` keyword,
  please move to `var` or `deinit` as the warning indicates.

- The previously deprecated `@value` decorator has been removed.

- Accesses to associated aliases and methods within a trait now require
  qualified references (prepended with `Self.`), making it consistent with how
  accesses to member aliases and methods in a struct require `self.`.

- The Mojo compiler now raises error on implicit materialization of a
  non-`ImplicitlyCopyable` object, please either mark the type to be
  `ImplicitlyCopyable` or using `materialize[value: T]()` to explicitly
  materialize the parameter into a dynamic value.

  This usually happens when you generate a compile-time value using the `alias`
  keyword, then assign it to a runtime variable:

  ```mojo
  alias lst = [1, 2, 3, 4]  # Create a compile-time list value
  var dyn_list = lst  # Implicitly materializes the compile-time value to a
                      #  dynamically-allocated runtime value
  ```

  The alias is a compile-time temporary value; to assign it to a runtime
  variable, Mojo must allocate memory and copy the value. Since this can result
  in unexpected memory allocations when materializing a memory value like a
  list, Mojo only allows implicit materializations of memory values if the type
  is `ImplicitlyCopyable`, which is a signal that the type should be inexpensive
  to copy.

  You can use the `materialize()` function to explicitly materialize a value:

  ```mojo
   var dyn_list = materialize[lst]()
  ```

## Standard library changes {#25-6-standard-library-changes}

### Copyability changes

- The way copying is modeled in Mojo has been overhauled.

  Previously, Mojo had two traits for modeling copyability:

  - `Copyable` denoted a type that could be copied implicitly
  - `ExplicitlyCopyable` denoted a type that could only be copied with an
    explicit call to a `.copy()` method.

  The vast majority of types defaulted to implementing `Copyable` (and therefore
  were implicitly copyable), and `ExplicitlyCopyable` was partially phased in
  but had significant usage limitations.

  Now, the new `Copyable` trait instead represents a type that can be
  *explicitly* copied (using `.copy()`), and a new `ImplicitlyCopyable` "marker"
  trait can be used to *opt-in* to making a type implicitly copyable as well.
  This swaps the default behavior from being implicitly copyable to being only
  explicitly copyable.

  The new `ImplicitlyCopyable` trait inherits from `Copyable`, and requires
  no additional methods. `ImplicitlyCopyable` is known specially to the
  compiler. (`ImplicitlyCopyable` types may also be copied explicitly using
  `.copy()`.)

  This makes it possible for non-implicitly-copyable types to be used with all
  standard library functionality, resolving a long-standing issue with Mojo
  effectively forcing implicit copyability upon all types.
  This will enable Mojo programs to be more efficient and readable, with fewer
  performance and correctness issues caused by accidental implicit copies.

  With this change, types that conform to `Copyable` are no longer implicitly
  copyable:

  ```mojo
  @fieldwise_init
  struct Person(Copyable):
      var name: String

  fn main():
      var p = Person("Connor")
      var p2 = p           # ERROR: not implicitly copyable
      var p3 = p.copy()    # OK: may be copied explicitly
  ```

  To enable a type to be implicitly copyable, declare a conformance to the
  `ImplicitlyCopyable` marker trait:

  ```mojo
  @fieldwise_init
  struct Point(ImplicitlyCopyable):
      var x: Float32
      var y: Float32

  fn main():
      var p = Point(5, 10)
      var p2 = p           # OK: may be implicitly copied
      var p3 = p.copy()    # OK: may be explicitly copied
  ```

  An additional nuance is that `ImplicitlyCopyable` may only be synthesized for
  types whose fields are all themselves `ImplicitlyCopyable` (and not merely
  `Copyable`). If you need to make a type with any non-`ImplicitlyCopyable`
  fields support implicit copying, you can declare the conformance to
  `ImplicitlyCopyable`, but write the `__copyinit__()` definition manually:

  ```mojo
  struct Container(ImplicitlyCopyable):
      var x: SomeCopyableType
      var y: SomeImplicitlyCopyableType

      fn __copyinit__(out self, existing: Self):
          self.x = existing.x.copy()   # Copy field explicitly
          self.y = existing.y
  ```

  For more information on copyability, see the section on
  [copy constructors](/docs/manual/lifecycle/life/#copy-constructor) in the Mojo
  manual.

- The following standard library types and functions now require only explicit
  `Copyable` for their element and argument types, enabling their use with
  types that are not implicitly copyable:
  [`List`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/),
  [`Span`](/docs/std/memory/span/Span/),
  [`InlineArray`](/docs/std/collections/inline_array/InlineArray/)
  [`Optional`](/docs/std/collections/optional/Optional/),
  [`Variant`](/docs/std/utils/variant/Variant/),
  [`Tuple`](/docs/std/builtin/tuple/Tuple/),
  [`Dict`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/),
  [`Set`](/docs/std/collections/set/Set/),
  [`Counter`](/docs/std/collections/counter/Counter/),
  [`LinkedList`](/docs/std/collections/linked_list/LinkedList/),
  [`Deque`](/docs/std/collections/deque/Deque/), and
  [`reversed()`](/docs/std/builtin/reversed/reversed/).

  Additionally, the following traits now require explicit `Copyable` instead
  of `ImplicitlyCopyable`:
  `KeyElement`, `IntervalElement`, `ConvertibleFromPython`

- The following Mojo standard library types are no longer implicitly copyable:
  [`List`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/),
  [`Dict`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/),
  [`DictEntry`](/docs/std/collections/dict/DictEntry/),
  [`OwnedKwargsDict`](/docs/std/collections/dict/OwnedKwargsDict/),
  [`Set`](/docs/std/collections/set/Set/),
  [`LinkedList`](/docs/std/collections/linked_list/LinkedList/),
  [`Node`](/docs/std/collections/linked_list/Node/)
  [`Counter`](/docs/std/collections/counter/Counter/),
  [`CountTuple`](/docs/std/collections/counter/CountTuple/),
  [`BitSet`](/docs/std/collections/bitset/BitSet/), `UnsafeMaybeUninitialized`,
  `DLHandle`, [`BenchConfig`](/docs/std/benchmark/bencher/BenchConfig/),
  [`BenchmarkInfo`](/docs/std/benchmark/bencher/BenchmarkInfo/),
  [`Report`](/docs/std/benchmark/benchmark/Report/),
  [`PythonTypeBuilder`](/docs/std/python/bindings/PythonTypeBuilder/).

  To create a copy of one of these types, call the `.copy()` method explicitly:

  ```mojo
  var l = List[Int](1, 2, 3)

  # ERROR: Implicit copying of `List` is no longer supported:
  # var l2 = l

  # Instead, perform an explicit copy:
  var l2 = l.copy()
  ```

  Alternatively, to transfer ownership,
  [use the `^` transfer sigil](/docs/manual/values/ownership/#transfer-arguments-var-and-):

  ```mojo
  var l = List[Int](1, 2, 3)
  var l2 = l^
  # `l` is no longer accessible.
  ```

- Because `List` and `Dict` are so widely used, this release stages this in by
  making implicit copies of these types a warning instead of an error. This
  will become a hard error in the next release of Mojo.

- User types that define a custom `.copy()` method must be updated to move
  that logic to `__copyinit__()`. The `.copy()` method is now provided by a
  default trait implementation on `Copyable` that should not be overridden:

  ```mojo
  trait Copyable:
      fn __copyinit__(out self, existing: Self, /):
          ...

      fn copy(self) -> Self:
          return Self.__copyinit__(self)
  ```

### SIMD and related types {#25-6-simd-and-related-types}

- The comparison operators (e.g. `__eq__()` and `__le__()`) of the `SIMD` type
  now return a single `Bool` instead of a boolean `SIMD` mask. Moreover, `SIMD`
  now has explicit element-wise comparisons that return boolean masks (for
  example, `eq()` and `le()`).
  - This allows `SIMD` to conform to the `EqualityComparable` trait, enabling
    the use of `SIMD` vectors in sets, as keys to dictionaries, generic search
    algorithms, etc. Moreover, `Scalar` now conforms to the `Comparable` trait,
    i.e. `SIMD` conforms to `Comparable` when the size is 1.
  - As a consequence, `SIMD.__bool__()` no longer needs to be restricted to
    scalars, and instead performs an `any` reduction on the elements of vectors.

- Non-scalar `SIMD` constructors no longer allow implicit splatting of `Bool`
  values. This could lead to subtle bugs that cannot be caught at compile time,
  for example:

  ```mojo
  fn foo[w: Int](v: SIMD[_, w]) -> SIMD[DType.bool, w]:
    return v == 42  # this silently reduced to a single bool, and then splat
  ```

  Similarly to `InlineArray`, an explicit constructor with the `fill`
  keyword-only argument can be used to express the same logic more safely:

  ```mojo
  fn foo[w: Int](v: SIMD[_, w]) -> SIMD[DType.bool, w]:
    return SIMD[DType.bool, w](fill=(v == 42))  # highlights the splat logic

  fn bar(Scalar[_]) -> Scalar[DType.bool]:
    # still works, since implicit splatting to a scalar is never ambiguous
    return v == 42
  ```

- Several types that wrap MLIR types have been changed to further
  encapsulate their behavior, hiding this low-level behavior from non-advanced
  users.

  - Types that can be constructed from raw MLIR values now require the use
    of an `mlir_value` keyword-only argument initializer.
    Affected types include `SIMD` and `UInt`.

  - Types with raw MLIR type fields have had their `value` fields renamed to
    `_mlir_value`.
    Affected types include: `Bool` and `DType`.

- The `SIMD.from_bits()` factory method is now a constructor, use
  `SIMD(from_bits=...)` instead.

- `DType.index` is deprecated in favor of the new `DType.int`. Moreover, a new
  `DType.uint` is added, modeling unsigned integers with widths that match the
  machine word length.

- The `index()` free function now returns an `Int`, instead of a raw MLIR
  `__mlir_type.index` value.

### Path and file system changes

- Added the [`parts()`](/docs/std/pathlib/path/Path/#parts) method to the
  `Path` type, for example instead of writing:

  ```mojo
  var path = Path("path/to/file")
  var parts = path.path.split(DIR_SEPARATOR)
  ```

  you can now write:

  ```mojo
  var path = Path("path/to/file")
  var parts = path.parts()
  ```

- Added the [`name()`](/docs/std/pathlib/path/Path/#name) method to the
  `Path` type, which returns the name of the file or directory.

- Added `os.path.realpath()` to resolve symbolic links to an absolute path and
  remove relative path components (`.`, `..`, etc.). Behaves the same as the
  Python equivalent function.

### Collections and iterators changes {#25-6-collections-and-iterators-changes}

- Added an [`iter`](/docs/std/iter/) module which includes the new `Iterable`
  trait (and the existing `Iterator` trait). The module also provides the
  [`enumerate()`](/docs/std/iter/enumerate/),
  [`iter()`](/docs/std/iter/iter/), [`map()`](/docs/std/iter/map/),
  [`next()`](/docs/std/iter/next/), and [`zip()`](/docs/std/iter/zip/)
  functions. The new generic `zip()` function replaces the `IntTuple`-specific
  `zip()` function provided in previous releases.

  - `Iterable`'s `origin` parameter is now named `iterable_origin`
    and its `mut` param is now named `iterator_mut` to avoid naming collisions.

- [`Iterator`](/docs/std/iter/Iterator/) now has a defaulted `bounds()` trait
  method. This returns the lower and upper bounds of the remaining length of the
  iterator. This can be used for preallocation when building or extending
  collections from iterators.

- Added [`take_items()`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/#take_items)
  draining iterator to `Dict`.

- [`Span`](/docs/std/memory/span/Span/) is now `Representable` if its
  elements implement the `Representable` trait.

- Add `repr()` support for [`List`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/),
  [`Deque`](/docs/std/collections/deque/Deque/),
  [`Dict`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/),
  [`LinkedList`](/docs/std/collections/linked_list/LinkedList/),
  [`Optional`](/docs/std/collections/optional/Optional/), and
  [`Set`](/docs/std/collections/set/Set/).

- [`InlineArray`](/docs/std/collections/inline_array/InlineArray/) now
  automatically detects whether its element types are trivially destructible to
  not invoke the destructors in its `__del__()` function. This improves
  performance for trivially destructible types (such as `Int` and friends).

- Similar to above, `List` now automatically does optimizations based on
  whether the element types are trivial (copyable, destructible, etc). There
  is no longer a `hint_trivial_type` parameter as this is done automatically
  now.

- `String.splitlines()` now returns a `List[StringSlice]` instead of a
  `List[String]`. This avoids unnecessary intermediate allocations.

- `StringSlice.from_utf8()` factory method is now a constructor, use
  `StringSlice(from_utf8=...)` instead.

- `Span` now implements a generic `.count()` method which can be passed a
  function that returns a boolean `SIMD` vector. The function counts how many
  times it returns `True` evaluating it in a vectorized manner. This works for
  any `Span[Scalar[D]]` e.g. `Span[Byte]`.

- [`Optional`](/docs/std/collections/optional/Optional/) and
  [`OptionalReg`](/docs/std/collections/optional/OptionalReg/) can now be
  composed with `Bool` in expressions, both at comptime and runtime:

  ```mojo
  alias value = Optional[Int](42)

  @parameter
  if CompilationTarget.is_macos() and value:
      print("is macos and value is:", value.value())
  ```

- [`sort()`](/docs/std/builtin/sort/sort/),
  [`LinkedList.pop()`](/docs/std/collections/linked_list/LinkedList/#pop),
  [`LinkedList.maybe_pop()`](/docs/std/collections/linked_list/LinkedList/#maybe_pop)
  and [`Dict.popitem()`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/#popitem) no longer
  copy elements, improving performance.

- The `IndexList` and `DimList` types may no longer be implicitly constructed
  from tuple values. Most existing call sites already used explicit initializer
  calls (`IndexList(...)`), so implicit conversions have been removed to ensure
  uniformity and consistency.

### Pointer changes

- Removed the `alignment` parameter and `static_alignment_cast()` method from
  [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/). This
  `alignment` parameter that was only used by the `alloc()` static method.

- Added an `alignment` keyword argument to `UnsafePointer.alloc()`. Use this
  in place of the `alignment` parameter on the struct.

- Removed the `alignment` parameter from `Span`, similar to `UnsafePointer`
  above.

- The `UnsafePointer.init_pointee_explicit_copy()` method has been removed.
  Please use
  [`UnsafePointer.init_pointee_copy()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#init_pointee_copy)
  instead.

- `UnsafePointer.move_pointee_into()` has been deprecated. Please use
  [`UnsafePointer.init_pointee_move_from()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#init_pointee_move_from).

  `src.move_pointee_into(dst)` used a reversed argument order from intuitive
  `LHS = RHS` semantics for assignment, effectively `RHS -> LHS`. The new
  function fixes this readability issue (`dst.init_pointee_move_from(src)`), and
  additionally follows the `init_pointee_*()` naming convention of the other
  existing methods for initializer a pointer memory location.

### Atomic operations

- Added [`os.atomic.fence()`](/docs/std/atomic/atomic/fence/) for creating
  atomic memory fences.

  ```mojo
    from os.atomic import Atomic, Consistency, fence

    fn decrease_ref_count(ref_count: Atomic[DType.uint64]):
      if atomic.fetch_sub[ordering = Consistency.MONOTONIC](1) == 1:
        fence[Consistency.ACQUIRE]()
        # ...
  ```

- Add a memory ordering parameter to
  [`Atomic.load()`](/docs/std/atomic/atomic/Atomic/).

### System changes

- Added `sys.info.platform_map()` for specifying types that can have different
  values depending on the platform:

  ```mojo
  from sys.info import platform_map

  alias EDEADLK = platform_map["EDEADLK", linux = 35, macos = 11]()
  ```

- Renamed a number of functions following functions in `sys.info` from
  `flatcase` to `snake_case` names:

  | Old name          | New name            |
  |-------------------|---------------------|
  | `alignof()`       | `align_of()`        |
  | `bitwidthof()`    | `bit_width_of()`    |
  | `simdbitwidth()`  | `simd_bit_width()`  |
  | `simdbytewidth()` | `simd_byte_width()` |
  | `simdwidthof()`   | `simd_width_of()`   |
  | `sizeof()`        | `size_of()`         |

  The old names are deprecated, and will be removed in the next release.

### GPU Support {#25-6-gpu-support}

- Added initial support for programming Apple Silicon GPUs in Mojo. However,
  MAX graphs are not yet enabled on Apple Silicon GPUs, and many hardware
  features remain to be enabled.

- Added support for AMD RX 6900 XT consumer-grade GPU.

- Added support for AMD RDNA3.5 consumer-grade GPUs in the `gfx1150`, `gfx1151`,
  and `gfx1152` architectures. Representative configurations have been added for
  AMD Radeon 860M, 880M, and 8060S GPUs.

- Added support for NVIDIA GTX 1080 Ti consumer-grade GPUs.

- Added support for NVIDIA Tesla P100 datacenter GPUs.

- Updated `layout_tensor()` copy related functions to support 2D and 3D
  threadblock dimensions.

### Other standard library changes {#25-6-other-standard-library-changes}

- A new `Some` utility is introduced to reduce the syntactic load of declaring
  function arguments of a type that implements a given trait or trait
  composition. For example, instead of writing

  ```mojo
  fn foo[T: Intable, //](x: T) -> Int:
      return x.__int__()
  ```

  one can now write:

  ```mojo
  fn foo(x: Some[Intable]) -> Int:
      return x.__int__()
  ```

- The
  [`compile.reflection.get_type_name()`](/docs/std/reflection/type_info/get_type_name/)
  utility now has limited capability to print parametric types, e.g.
  `SIMD[DType.float32, 4]` instead of just `SIMD`. If the parameter is not
  printable, an `<unprintable>` placeholder is printed instead. A new
  `qualified_builtins` flag also allows users to control the verbosity for the
  most common (but not all) builtin types.

## Kernels changes {#25-6-kernels-changes}

- A fast matmul for SM100 is available in Mojo. Please check it out in
  [`matmul_sm100.mojo`](https://github.com/modular/modular/commits/main/max/kernels/src/linalg/matmul_sm100.mojo).

- Moved the
  [`comm`](https://github.com/modular/modular/tree/main/max/kernels/src/comm)
  module from the standard library (`gpu.comm`) to the MAX AI kernels library.
  Any imports that used `gpu.comm` should be updated to `comm`, instead.

## Tooling changes {#25-6-tooling-changes}

- `mojo test` now ignores folders with a leading `.` in the name. This will
  exclude hidden folders on Unix systems.

- `mojo doc --validate-doc-strings` now emits a warning when an `fn` function is
  declared to raise an error (`raises`) and it has no
  [`Raises` docstring](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/mojo/stdlib/docs/docstring-style-guide.md#errors).
  However, because Mojo automatically treats all `def` functions as
  [raising functions](/docs/manual/functions/#raising-and-non-raising-functions),
  we do not enforce `Raises` docs for `def` functions (to avoid noisy false
  positives).

- Nightly `mojo` Python wheels are now available. To install everything needed
  for Mojo development in a Python virtual environment, you can use:

  ```sh
  pip install --pre mojo \
   --index-url https://dl.modular.com/public/nightly/python/simple/
  ```

  For more information, see the [Mojo install guide](/install/).

- In preparation for a future Mojo 1.0, the `mojo` and `mojo-compiler` packages
  have a `0.` prefixed to the version.

## Removed {#25-6-removed}

- The Mojo MLIR C bindings has been removed. This was a private package that was
  used for early experimentation.

## Fixed {#25-6-fixed}

- [#4695](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4695) - `Dict.__getitem__()`
  always returns immutable references.
- [#4705](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4705) - Wrong mutability
  inferred for `__getitem__()` if `[]` operator is used and `__setitem__()` is
  present.
- [#5190](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/5190) - Mojo compiler
  crashes for a struct with two constructors taking different keyword-only
  arguments.
- [#5139](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/5139) - Crash on malformed
  initializer.
- [#5183](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/5183) - `Log1p()` not
  working on GPUs.
- [#5105](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/5105) - Outdated `CLAUDE.md`
  docs.
- [#5239](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/5239) - Contextual type not
  detected inside an inline if-else.
- [#5305](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/5305) - Parser Segfaults on
  `LayoutTensor[layout]` with no `layout` in scope.
- [#5260](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/5260) - Undefined reference
  to `clock_gettime_nsec_np' when building with -O0.
- [#5307](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/5307) - Bad error message
  when getting GPU info for unsupported GPU.
- Error messages involving types using implicit parameters from
  auto-parameterized types now include context information to solve a class of
  incorrect "T != T" error messages common in kernel code.
- Parameter inference failures now refer to parameters by their user-provided
  name, rather than complaining about a mysterious "parameter #4".

## Special thanks {#25-6-special-thanks}

Special thanks to our community contributors:
[@AceMouse](https://github.com/AceMouse),
[@Alex-Mann](https://github.com/Alex-Mann),
[@christoph-schlumpf](https://github.com/christoph-schlumpf),
[@cudawarped](https://github.com/cudawarped),
[@cyrillzadra](https://github.com/cyrillzadra),
[@dl-alexandre](https://github.com/dl-alexandre),
[@farnoy](https://github.com/farnoy),
[@gabrieldemarmiesse](https://github.com/gabrieldemarmiesse),
[@gryznar](https://github.com/gryznar),
[@josiahls](https://github.com/josiahls),
[@kyoto7250](https://github.com/kyoto7250)
[@martinvuyk](https://github.com/martinvuyk),
[@mmicu](https://github.com/mmicu),
[@msaelices](https://github.com/msaelices),
[@mzaks](https://github.com/mzaks),
[@rd4com](https://github.com/rd4com),
[@Rtosshy](https://github.com/Rtosshy),
[@SasankYadati](https://github.com/SasankYadati),
[@simonyjung](https://github.com/simonyjung),
[@soraros](https://github.com/soraros), and
[@ThomasMader](https://github.com/ThomasMader).
