---
title: Mojo v24.5
date: 2024-09-13
---

## Highlights

Here's a brief summary of some of the major changes in this release, with more
detailed information in the following sections:

- Mojo now supports Python 3.12 interoperability.

- The set of automatically imported entities (types, aliases, functions) into
  users' Mojo programs has been dramatically reduced. This can break existing
  user code as users will need to explicitly import what they're using for cases
  previously automatically included before.

- [`print()`](/docs/std/io/io/print/) now requires that its arguments
  conform to the [`Formattable`](/docs/std/format/Writable/) trait.
  This enables efficient stream-based writing by default, avoiding unnecessary
  intermediate String heap allocations.

- The new builtin [`input()`](/docs/std/io/io/input/) function prints an
  optional prompt and reads a line from standard input, in the same way as
  Python.

- Mojo now allows implicit definitions of variables within a `fn` in the same
  way that has been allowed in a `def`. The `var` keyword is still allowed, but
  is now optional.

- Mojo now diagnoses "argument exclusivity" violations due to aliasing
  references. Mojo requires references (including implicit references due to
  `borrowed`/`inout` arguments) to be uniquely referenced (non-aliased) if
  mutable. This is a warning in the 24.5 release, but will be upgraded to an
  error in subsequent releases.

- Mojo now supports "conditional conformances" where some methods on a struct
  have additional trait requirements that the struct itself doesn't.

- `DTypePointer`, `LegacyPointer`, and `Pointer` have been removed. Use
  [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/) instead.
  Functions that previously took a `DTypePointer` now take an equivalent
  `UnsafePointer`. For more information on using pointers, see [Unsafe
  pointers](/docs/manual/pointers/unsafe-pointers) in the Mojo Manual.

- There are many new standard library APIs, with new features for strings,
  collections, and interacting with the filesystem and environment. Changes are
  listed in the standard library section.

- The VS Code extension now supports a vendored MAX SDK for VS Code, which is
  automatically downloaded by the extension and it's used for all Mojo features,
  including the Mojo Language Server, the Mojo debugger, the Mojo formatter, and
  more.

- [`mojo test`](/docs/tools/testing/) now uses the Mojo compiler for running
  unit tests. This will resolve compilation issues that sometimes appeared, and
  will also improve overall test execution times.

## Language changes

- Mojo now allows implicit definitions of variables within a `fn` in the same
  way that has been allowed in a `def`. The `var` keyword is still allowed and
  still denotes the declaration of a new variable with a scope (in both `def`
  and `fn`). Relaxing this makes `fn` and `def` more similar, but they still
  differ in other important ways.

- Mojo now diagnoses "argument exclusivity" violations due to aliasing
  references. Mojo requires references (including implicit references due to
  `borrowed`/`inout` arguments) to be uniquely referenced (non-aliased) if
  mutable. This is important for code safety, because it allows the compiler
  (and readers of code) to understand where and when a value is mutated. It is
  also useful for performance optimization because it allows the compiler to
  know that accesses through immutable references cannot change behind the
  scenes. Here is an invalid example:

  ```mojo
  fn take_two_strings(a: String, inout b: String):
     # Mojo knows 'a' and 'b' cannot be the same string.
     b += a

  fn invalid_access():
    var my_string = String()

    # warning: passing `my_string` inout is invalid since it is also passed
    # borrowed.
    take_two_strings(my_string, my_string)
  ```

  This is similar to
  [Swift exclusivity checking](https://swift.org/blog/swift-5-exclusivity/) and
  the
  [Rust language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/beta/book/ch04-02-references-and-borrowing.html)
  sometimes known as "aliasing xor mutability". That said, the Mojo
  implementation details are somewhat different because lifetimes are embedded
  in types.

  This is a warning in the 24.5 release, but will be upgraded to an error in
  subsequent releases.

  :::note
  Argument exclusivity is not enforced for register-passable types. They are
  passed by copy, so they don't form aliases.
  :::

- Mojo now supports "conditional conformances" where some methods on a struct
  have additional trait requirements that the struct itself doesn't. This is
  expressed through an explicitly declared `self` type:

  ```mojo
  struct GenericThing[Type: AnyType]:  # Works with anything
    # Sugar for 'fn normal_method[Type: AnyType](self: GenericThing[Type]):'
    fn normal_method(self): ...

    # Just redeclare the requirements with more specific types:
    fn needs_move[Type: Movable](self: GenericThing[Type], owned val: Type):
      var tmp = val^  # Ok to move 'val' since it is Movable
      ...
  fn usage_example():
    var a = GenericThing[Int]()
    a.normal_method() # Ok, Int conforms to AnyType
    a.needs_move(42)  # Ok, Int is movable

    var b = GenericThing[NonMovable]()
    b.normal_method() # Ok, NonMovable conforms to AnyType

      # error: argument type 'NonMovable' does not conform to trait 'Movable'
    b.needs_move(NonMovable())
  ```

  Conditional conformance works with dunder methods and other things as well.

- As a specific form of "conditional conformances", initializers in a struct
  may indicate specific parameter bindings to use in the type of their `self`
  argument. For example:

  ```mojo
  @value
  struct MyStruct[size: Int]:
      fn __init__(inout self: MyStruct[0]): pass
      fn __init__(inout self: MyStruct[1], a: Int): pass
      fn __init__(inout self: MyStruct[2], a: Int, b: Int): pass

  def test(x: Int):
      a = MyStruct()      # Infers size=0 from 'self' type.
      b = MyStruct(x)     # Infers size=1 from 'self' type.
      c = MyStruct(x, x)  # Infers size=2 from 'self' type.
  ```

- Mojo now supports named result bindings. Named result bindings are useful for
  directly emplacing function results into the output slot of a function. This
  feature provides more flexibility and guarantees around emplacing the result
  of a function compared to "guaranteed" named return value optimization (NRVO).
  If a `@register_passable` result is bound to a name, the result value is made
  accessible as a mutable reference.

  ```mojo
  fn efficiently_return_string(b: Bool) -> String as output:
      if b:
          output = "emplaced!"
          mutate(output)
          return
      return "regular return"
  ```

  If we used a temporary for `output` instead, we would need to move into the
  result slot, which wouldn't work if the result type was non-movable.

  In a function with a named result, `return` may be used with no operand to
  signal an exit from the function, or it can be used normally to specify the
  return value of the function. The compiler will error if the result is not
  initialized on all normal exit paths from the function.

- `__setitem__()` now works with variadic argument lists such as:

  ```mojo
  struct YourType:
      fn __setitem__(inout self, *indices: Int, val: Int): ...
  ```

  The Mojo compiler now always passes the "new value" being set using the last
  keyword argument of the `__setitem__()`, e.g. turning `yourType[1, 2] = 3`
  into `yourType.__setitem__(1, 2, val=3)`. This fixes [Issue
  #248](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/248).

- Mojo context managers used in regions of code that may raise no longer need to
  define a "conditional" exit function in the form of
  `fn __exit__(self, e: Error) -> Bool`. This function allows the context
  manager to conditionally intercept and handle the error and allow the function
  to continue executing. This is useful for some applications, but in many cases
  the conditional exit would delegate to the unconditional exit function
  `fn __exit__(self)`.

  Concretely, this enables defining `with` regions that unconditionally
  propagate inner errors, allowing code like:

  ```mojo
  def might_raise() -> Int:
      ...

  def foo() -> Int:
      with ContextMgr():
          return might_raise()
      # no longer complains about missing return

  def bar():
      var x: Int
      with ContextMgr():
          x = might_raise()
      print(x) # no longer complains about 'x' being uninitialized
  ```

- `async` functions now support memory-only results (like `String`, `List`,
  etc.) and `raises`. Accordingly, both
  [`Coroutine`](/docs/std/builtin/coroutine/Coroutine/) and
  [`RaisingCoroutine`](/docs/std/builtin/coroutine/RaisingCoroutine/) have
  been changed to accept `AnyType` instead of `__TypeOfAllTypes`. This means
  the result types of `async` functions do not need to be `Movable`.

  ```mojo
  async fn raise_or_string(c: Bool) raises -> String:
      if c:
          raise "whoops!"
      return "hello world!"
  ```

  Note that `async` functions do not yet support indirect calls, `ref` results,
  and constructors.

- The [`Reference`](/docs/std/memory/pointer/Pointer/) type (and many
  iterators) now use [infer-only
  parameters](/docs/manual/parameters/#infer-only-parameters) to represent the
  mutability of their lifetime, simplifying the interface.

- The environment variable `MOJO_PYTHON` can be pointed to an executable to pin
  Mojo to a specific version:

  ```sh
  export MOJO_PYTHON="/usr/bin/python3.11"
  ```

  Or a virtual environment to always have access to those Python modules:

  ```sh
  export MOJO_PYTHON="~/venv/bin/python"
  ```

  `MOJO_PYTHON_LIBRARY` still exists for environments with a dynamic `libpython`
  but no Python executable.

- The pointer aliasing semantics of Mojo have changed. Initially, Mojo adopted a
  C-like set of semantics around pointer aliasing and derivation. However, the C
  semantics bring a lot of history and baggage that are not needed in Mojo and
  which complicate compiler optimizations. The language overall provides a
  stronger set of invariants around pointer aliasing with lifetimes and
  exclusive mutable references to values, etc.

  It is now forbidden to convert a non-pointer-typed value derived from a
  Mojo-allocated pointer, such as an integer address, to a pointer-typed value.
  "Derived" means there is overlap in the bits of the non-pointer-typed value
  with the original pointer value. Accordingly, the
  [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/)
  constructor that took an `address` keyword argument has been removed.

  It is still possible to make this conversion in certain cases where it is
  absolutely necessary, such as interoperating with other languages like Python.
  In this case, the compiler makes two assumptions: any pointer derived from a
  non-pointer-typed value does not alias any Mojo-derived pointer and that any
  external function calls have arbitrary memory effects.

- `await` on a coroutine now consumes it. This strengthens the invariant that
  coroutines can be awaited only once.

## Standard library changes

- [`builtin`](/docs/std/builtin/) package:

  - The set of automatically imported entities (types, aliases, functions) into
    users' Mojo programs has been dramatically reduced. Before, with the way the
    `builtin` module was handled, all of the entities in the following modules
    would be automatically included:

    `memory`, `sys`, `os`, `utils`, `python`, `bit`, `random`, `math`,
    `builtin`, `collections`

    Now, only the explicitly enumerated entities in `prelude/__init__.mojo` are
    the ones automatically imported into users' Mojo programs. This will break a
    lot of user code as users will need to explicitly import what they're using
    for cases previously commonly included before (such as
    [`Optional`](/docs/std/collections/optional/Optional/),
    [`Variant`](/docs/std/utils/variant/Variant/), and functions such as
    [`abort()`](/docs/std/os/os/abort/),
    [`alignof()`](/docs/std/sys/info/align_of/),
    [`bitcast()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe/bitcast/),
    [`bitwidthof()`](/docs/std/sys/info/bit_width_of/),
    [`external_call()`](/docs/std/ffi/external_call/),
    [`simdwidthof()`](/docs/std/sys/info/simd_width_of/), and
    [`sizeof()`](/docs/std/sys/info/size_of/)).

  - Some types from the `builtin` module have been moved to different modules
    for clarity which is made possible now that we have a `prelude` module that
    can re-export symbols from modules other than `builtin`.

    In particular, the `builtin.string` module has been moved to
    [`collections.string`](/docs/std/collections/string/).

- Input and output:

  - Added the builtin [`input()`](/docs/std/io/io/input/) function, which
    behaves the same as Python.
    ([PR #3392](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3392))

    ```mojo
    name = input("Enter your name: ")
    print("Hello, " + name + "!")
    ```

    If the user enters "Mojo" it returns "Hello, Mojo!"

    There is a known issue when running the `input()` function with JIT
    compilation (see issue
    [#3479](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3479)).

  - [`print()`](/docs/std/io/io/print/) now requires that its arguments conform
    to the [`Formattable`](/docs/std/format/Writable/) trait. This enables
    efficient stream-based writing by default, avoiding unnecessary intermediate
    String heap allocations.

    Previously, `print()` required types conform to `Stringable`. This meant
    that to execute a call like `print(a, b, c)`, at least three separate String
    heap allocations were down, to hold the formatted values of `a`, `b`, and
    `c` respectively. The total number of allocations could be much higher if,
    for example, `a.__str__()` was implemented to concatenate together the
    fields of `a`, like in the following example:

    ```mojo
    struct Point(Stringable):
        var x: Float64
        var y: Float64

        fn __str__(self) -> String:
            # Performs 3 allocations: 1 each for str(..) of each of the fields,
            # and then the final returned `String` allocation.
            return "(" + str(self.x) + ", " + str(self.y) + ")"
    ```

    A type like the one above can transition to additionally implementing
    `Formattable` with the following changes:

    ```mojo
    struct Point(Stringable, Formattable):
        var x: Float64
        var y: Float64

        fn __str__(self) -> String:
            return String.format_sequence(self)

        fn format_to(self, inout writer: Formatter):
            writer.write("(", self.x, ", ", self.y, ")")
    ```

    In the example above,
    [`String.format_sequence()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#format_sequence)
    is used to construct a `String` from a type that implements `Formattable`.
    This pattern of implementing a type's `Stringable` implementation in terms
    of its `Formattable` implementation minimizes boilerplate and duplicated
    code, while retaining backwards compatibility with the requirements of the
    commonly used `str()` function.

    <!-- TODO(MOCO-891): Remove this warning when error is improved. -->

    :::note
    The error shown when passing a type that does not implement `Formattable` to
    `print()` is currently not entirely descriptive of the underlying cause:

    ```shell
    error: invalid call to 'print': callee with non-empty variadic pack argument expects 0 positional operands, but 1 was specified
       print(point)
       ~~~~~^~~~~~~
    ```

    If you see the above error, ensure that all argument types implement
    `Formattable`.
    :::

  - [`debug_assert()`](/docs/std/builtin/debug_assert/debug_assert) now also
    requires that its `message` argument conform to `Formattable`.

  - Added
    [`TemporaryDirectory`](/docs/std/tempfile/tempfile/TemporaryDirectory) in
    module `tempfile`.
    ([PR 2743](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2743))

  - Added
    [`NamedTemporaryFile`](/docs/std/tempfile/tempfile/NamedTemporaryFile) in
    module `tempfile`.
    ([PR 2762](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2762))

- [`String`](/docs/std/collections/string/string) and friends:

  - The `builtin.string` module has been moved to
    [`collections.string`](/docs/std/collections/string/).

  - Added the
    [`String.format()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String#format)
    method. ([PR #2771](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2771))

    Supports automatic and manual indexing of `*args`.

    Examples:

    ```mojo
    print(
      String("{1} Welcome to {0} {1}").format("mojo", "🔥")
    )
    # 🔥 Wecome to mojo 🔥
    ```

    ```mojo
    print(String("{} {} {}").format(True, 1.125, 2))
    #True 1.125 2
    ```

  - [`String.format()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String#format)
    now supports conversion flags `!s` and `!r`, allowing for `str()` and
    `repr()` conversions within format strings. ([PR
    #3279](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3279))

    Example:

    ```mojo
    String("{} {!r}").format("Mojo", "Mojo")
    # "Mojo 'Mojo'"

    String("{0!s} {0!r}").format("Mojo")
    # "Mojo 'Mojo'"
    ```

  - The `String` class now has
    [`rjust()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String#rjust),
    [`ljust()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String#ljust), and
    [`center()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String#center) methods
    to return a justified string based on width and fillchar. ([PR
    #3278](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3278))

  - The [`atol()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/atol) function now
    correctly supports leading underscores, (e.g.`atol("0x_ff", 0)`), when the
    appropriate base is specified or inferred (base 0). non-base-10 integer
    literals as per Python's
    [Integer Literals](<https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html#integers>).
    ([PR #3180](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3180))

  - Added the
    [`unsafe_cstr_ptr()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String#unsafe_cstr_ptr)
    method to `String` and `StringLiteral`, which returns an
    `UnsafePointer[c_char]` for convenient interoperability with C APIs.

  - Added the `byte_length()` method to
    [`String`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String#byte_length),
    [`StringSlice`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice#byte_length),
    and
    [`StringLiteral`](/docs/std/builtin/string_literal/StringLiteral#byte_length)
    and deprecated their private `_byte_length()` methods. Added a warning to
    the [`String.__len__()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String#__len__)
    method that it will return the length in Unicode codepoints in the future
    and
    [`StringSlice.__len__()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice#__len__)
    now does return the Unicode codepoints length.
    ([PR #2960](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2960))

  - Added a new
    [`StaticString`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/#aliases) type
    alias. This can be used in place of
    [`StringLiteral`](/docs/std/builtin/string_literal/StringLiteral) for
    runtime string arguments.

  - Added a
    [`StringSlice`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice#__init__)
    initializer that accepts a `StringLiteral`.

  - The `StringRef` constructors from `DTypePointer.int8` have been changed to
    take a `UnsafePointer[c_char]`, reflecting their use for compatibility with
    C APIs.

  - Continued the transition to `UnsafePointer` and unsigned byte type for
    strings:

    - [`String.unsafe_ptr()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String#unsafe_ptr)
      now returns an `UnsafePointer[UInt8]` (was `UnsafePointer[Int8]`)

    - [`StringLiteral.unsafe_ptr()`](/docs/std/builtin/string_literal/StringLiteral#unsafe_ptr)
      now returns an `UnsafePointer[UInt8]` (was `UnsafePointer[Int8]`)

- [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer) and other
  reference type changes:

  - `DTypePointer`, `LegacyPointer`, and `Pointer` have been removed. Use
    [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer) instead.
    For more information on using pointers, see [Unsafe
    pointers](/docs/manual/pointers/unsafe-pointers) in the Mojo Manual.

    Functions that previously took a `DTypePointer` now take an equivalent
    `UnsafePointer`. A quick rule for conversion from `DTypePointer` to
    `UnsafePointer` is:

    ```mojo
    DTypePointer[type] -> UnsafePointer[Scalar[type]]
    ```

    There could be places that you have code of the form:

    ```mojo
    fn f(ptr: DTypePointer):
    ```

    which is equivalent to `DTypePointer[*_]`. In this case you would have to
    add an infer-only `type` parameter to the function:

    ```mojo
    fn f[type: DType, //](ptr: UnsafePointer[Scalar[type]]):
    ```

    because we can’t have an unbound parameter inside the struct.

    There could also be places where you use
    `DTypePointer[Scalar[DType.invalid/index]]`, and it would be natural to
    change these to `UnsafePointer[NoneType/Int]`. But since these are not an
    `UnsafePointer` that stores a `Scalar`, you might have to `rebind/bitcast`
    to appropriate types.

  - The `DTypePointer`
    [`load()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#load) and
    [`store()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#store) methods
    have been moved to `UnsafePointer`.

  - `UnsafePointer` now supports
    [`strided_load()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#strided_load),
    [`strided_store()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#strided_store),
    [`gather()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#gather), and
    [`scatter()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#scatter) when
    the underlying type is `Scalar[DType]`.

  - The global functions for working with `UnsafePointer` have transitioned to
    being methods through the use of conditional conformances:

    - `destroy_pointee(p)` =>
      [`p.destroy_pointee()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#destroy_pointee)
    - `move_from_pointee(p)` =>
      [`p.take_pointee()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#take_pointee)
    - `initialize_pointee_move(p, value)` =>
      [`p.init_pointee_move(value)`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#init_pointee_move)
    - `initialize_pointee_copy(p, value)` =>
      [`p.init_pointee_copy(value)`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#init_pointee_copy)
    - `move_pointee(src=p1, dst=p2)` =>
      [`p.move_pointee_into(p2)`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#move_pointee_into)

  - The `UnsafePointer.offset()` method is deprecated and will be removed in a
    future release. Use [pointer
    arithmetic](/docs/manual/pointers#storing-multiple-values) instead.

    ```mojo
    new_ptr = ptr.offset(1)
    ```

    Becomes:

    ```mojo
    new_ptr = ptr + 1
    ```

  - `UnsafePointer` now has an
    [`alignment`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#parameters)
    parameter to specify the static alignment of the pointer. Consequently,
    [`UnsafePointer.alloc()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#alloc)
    no longer takes in an alignment parameter, and the alignment should be
    specified in the type.

    ```mojo
    UnsafePointer[type].alloc[alignment](x) # now becomes
    UnsafePointer[type, alignment].alloc(x)
    ```

  - `UnsafePointer` has a new [`exclusive: Bool =
    False`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#parameters)
    parameter. Setting this parameter to true tells the compiler that the user
    knows this pointer and all those derived from it have exclusive access to
    the underlying memory allocation. The compiler is not guaranteed to do
    anything with this information.

  - It is no longer possible to cast (implicitly or explicitly) from `Reference`
    to `UnsafePointer`. Instead of `UnsafePointer(someRef)` please use the
    [`UnsafePointer.address_of(someRef[])`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer#address_of)
    which makes the code explicit that the `UnsafePointer` gets the address of
    what the reference points to.

- Python interoperability changes:

  - Mojo now supports Python 3.12 interoperability.

  - Creating a nested
    [`PythonObject`](/docs/std/python/python_object/PythonObject) from a list
    or tuple of Python objects is possible now:

    ```mojo
    var np = Python.import_module("numpy")
    var a = np.array([1, 2, 3])
    var b = np.array([4, 5, 6])
    var arrays = PythonObject([a, b])
    assert_equal(len(arrays), 2)
    ```

    Also allowing more convenient call syntax:

    ```mojo
    var stacked = np.hstack((a, b))
    assert_equal(str(stacked), "[1 2 3 4 5 6]")
    ```

    ([PR #3264](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3264))

  - Accessing local Python modules with
    [`Python.add_to_path(".")`](/docs/std/python/python/Python#add_to_path)
    is no longer required. It now behaves the same as Python. You can access
    modules in the same folder as the target file:

    - `mojo run /tmp/main.mojo` can access `/tmp/mymodule.py`

    - `mojo build main.mojo -o ~/myexe && ~/myexe` can access `~/mymodule.py`

- Collections:

  - [`List`](/docs/std/collections/list/List) values are now equality
    comparable with `==` and `!=` when their element type is equality
    comparable. ([PR #3195](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3195))

  - [`Optional`](/docs/std/collections/optional/Optional) values are now
    equality comparable with `==` and `!=` when their element type is equality
    comparable.

  - Added a new [`Counter`](/docs/std/collections/counter/Counter)
    dictionary-like type, matching most of the features of the Python one.
    ([PR #2910](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2910))

  - [`Dict`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict) now implements
    [`setdefault()`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict#setdefault), which gets
    a value from the dictionary by key, or sets it to a default if it doesn't
    exist.
    ([PR #2803](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2803))

  - `Dict` now supports
    [`popitem()`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict#popitem), which removes and
    returns the last item in the `Dict`.
    ([PR #2701](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2701))

  - Added a [`Dict.__init__()`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict#__init__)
    overload to specify initial capacity.
    ([PR #3171](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3171))

    The capacity has to be a power of two and greater than or equal to 8.

    It allows for faster initialization by skipping incremental growth steps.

    Example:

    ```mojo
    var dictionary = Dict[Int,Int](power_of_two_initial_capacity = 1024)
    # Insert (2/3 of 1024) entries
    ```

  - `ListLiteral` now supports `__contains__()`.
    ([PR #3251](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3251))

- Filesystem and environment utilities:

  - [`Path.home()`](/docs/std/pathlib/path/Path#home) has been added to
    return a path of the user's home directory.

  - [`os.path.expanduser()`](/docs/std/os/path/path/expanduser) and
    [`pathlib.Path.exapanduser()`](/docs/std/pathlib/path/Path#expanduser)
    have been added to allow expanding a prefixed `~` in a `String` or `Path`
    with the user's home path:

    ```mojo
    import os
    print(os.path.expanduser("~/.modular"))
    # /Users/username/.modular
    print(os.path.expanduser("~root/folder"))
    # /var/root/folder (on macos)
    # /root/folder     (on linux)
    ```

  - [`os.path.split()`](/docs/std/os/path/path/split) has been added for
    splitting a path into `head, tail`:

    ```mojo
    import os
    head, tail = os.path.split("/this/is/head/tail")
    print("head:", head)
    print("tail:", tail)
    # head: /this/is/head
    # tail: tail
    ```

  - [`os.makedirs()`](/docs/std/os/os/makedirs) and
    [`os.removedirs()`](/docs/std/os/os/removedirs) have been added for
    creating and removing nested directories:

    ```mojo
    import os
    path = os.path.join("dir1", "dir2", "dir3")
    os.path.makedirs(path, exist_ok=True)
    os.path.removedirs(path)
    ```

  - The [`pwd`](/docs/std/pwd/pwd/) module has been added for accessing user
    information in `/etc/passwd` on POSIX systems. This follows the same logic
    as Python:

    ```mojo
    import pwd
    import os
    current_user = pwd.getpwuid(os.getuid())
    print(current_user)

    # pwd.struct_passwd(pw_name='jack', pw_passwd='********', pw_uid=501,
    # pw_gid=20, pw_gecos='Jack Clayton', pw_dir='/Users/jack',
    # pw_shell='/bin/zsh')

    print(current_user.pw_uid)

    # 501

    root = pwd.getpwnam("root")
    print(root)

    # pwd.struct_passwd(pw_name='root', pw_passwd='*', pw_uid=0, pw_gid=0,
    # pw_gecos='System Administrator', pw_dir='/var/root', pw_shell='/bin/zsh')
    ```

- Other new traits and related features:

  - Added the
    `ExplicitlyCopyable` trait
    to mark types that can be copied explicitly, but which might not be
    implicitly copyable.

    This supports work to transition the standard library collection types away
    from implicit copyability, which can lead to unintended expensive copies.

  - Added the [`Identifiable`](/docs/std/builtin/identifiable/Identifiable)
    trait, used to describe types that implement the `__is__()` and
    `__isnot__()` trait methods.
    ([PR #2807](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2807))

  - Types conforming to [`Boolable`](/docs/std/builtin/bool/Boolable) (that
    is, those implementing `__bool__()`) no longer implicitly convert to `Bool`.
    A new `ImplicitlyBoolable`
    trait is introduced for types where this behavior is desired.

- Miscellaneous:

  - [`NoneType`](/docs/std/builtin/none/NoneType) is now a normal standard
    library type, and not an alias for a raw MLIR type.

    Function signatures written as `fn() -> NoneType` should transition to
    being written as `fn() -> None`.

  - Mojo now has a [`UInt`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/#uint) type for modeling
    unsigned (scalar) integers with a platform-dependent width. `UInt`
    implements most arithmetic operations that make sense for integers, with the
    notable exception of `__neg__()`. Builtin functions such as `min()`/`max()`,
    as well as `math` functions like `ceildiv()`, `align_down()`, and
    `align_up()` are also implemented for `UInt`.

  - Now that we have a `UInt` type, use this to represent the return type of a
    hash. In general, hashes should be an unsigned integer, and can also lead to
    improved performance in certain cases.

  - Added the [`c_char`](/docs/std/ffi/#aliases) type alias in `sys.ffi`.

  - [`sort()`](/docs/std/builtin/sort/sort) now supports a `stable`
    parameter. It can be called by

    ```mojo
    sort[cmp_fn, stable=True](list)
    ```

    The algorithm requires $$O(N)$$ auxiliary memory. If extra memory allocation
    fails, the program crashes.

  - `sort()` no longer takes `LegacyPointer` since that type is now removed.

  - Added the [`oct()`](/docs/std/builtin/format_int/oct) builtin function
    for formatting an integer in octal.
    ([PR #2914](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2914))

  - Added the [`assert_is()`](/docs/std/testing/testing/assert_is) and
    [`assert_is_not()`](/docs/std/testing/testing/assert_is_not) test
    functions to the `testing` module.

  - The [`math`](/docs/std/math/constants/) package now includes the `pi`,
    `e`, and `tau` constants (Closes Issue
    [#2135](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2135)).

  - The [`ulp`](/docs/std/math/math/ulp) function from `numerics` has been
    moved to the `math` module.

  - `bit` module now supports
    [`bit_reverse()`](/docs/std/bit/bit/bit_reverse),
    [`byte_swap()`](/docs/std/bit/bit/byte_swap), and
    [`pop_count()`](/docs/std/bit/bit/pop_count) for the `Int` type.
    ([PR #3150](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3150))

  - A few `bit` functions have been renamed for clarity:

    - `countl_zero()` ->
      [`count_leading_zeros()`](/docs/std/bit/bit/count_leading_zeros)

    - `countr_zero()` ->
      [`count_trailing_zeros()`](/docs/std/bit/bit/count_trailing_zeros)

  - [`Slice`](/docs/std/builtin/builtin_slice/Slice) now uses
    `OptionalReg[Int]` for `start` and `end` and implements a constructor which
    accepts optional values. `Slice._has_end()` has also been removed since a
    Slice with no end is now represented by an empty `Slice.end` option.
    ([PR #2495](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2495))

    ```mojo
      var s = Slice(1, None, 2)
      print(s.start.value()) # must retrieve the value from the optional
    ```

  - The `rank` argument for
    [`algorithm.elementwise()`](/docs/std/algorithm/functional/elementwise)
    is no longer required and is only inferred.

  - The `time.now()` function has been deprecated. Please use
    [`time.perf_counter()`](/docs/std/time/time/perf_counter) or
    [`time.perf_counter_ns`](/docs/std/time/time/perf_counter_ns) instead.

  - [`SIMD`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD) construction from `Bool` has been
    restricted to `DType.bool` data type.

## Tooling changes

- [`mojo test`](/docs/tools/testing) new features and changes:

  - `mojo test` now uses the Mojo compiler for running unit tests. This will
    resolve compilation issues that sometimes appeared, and will also improve
    overall test times, since we will only compile unit tests once before
    executing all of them.

    These changes do not apply to doctests, due to their different semantics.

  - The `mojo test` command now accepts a `--filter` option that will narrow the
    set of tests collected and executed. The filter string is a POSIX extended
    regular expression.

  - The `mojo test` command now supports using the same compilation options as
    `mojo build`.

  - You can now debug unit tests using `mojo test` by passing the `--debug`
    flag. Most debug flags are supported; run `mojo test --help` for a full
    listing.

    Debugging doctests is not currently supported.

- Mojo debugger new features and changes:

  - The `mojo debug --rpc` command has been renamed to [`mojo debug
    --vscode`](/docs/cli/debug#debug-server-options), which is now able to
    manage multiple VS Code windows.

  - The Mojo debugger now supports a `break-on-raise` command that indicated the
    debugger to stop at any `raise` statements. A similar features has been
    added to the debugger on VS Code.

  - The Mojo debugger now hides the artificial function arguments `__result__`
    and `__error__` created by the compiler for Mojo code.

- VS Code support changes:

  - The VS Code extension now supports a vendored MAX SDK for VS Code, which is
    automatically downloaded by the extension and it's used for all Mojo
    features, including the Mojo Language Server, the Mojo debugger, the Mojo
    formatter, and more.

  - A proxy has been added to the Mojo Language Server on VS Code that handles
    crashes more gracefully.

- The Mojo Language Server no longer sets `.` as a commit character for
  auto-completion.

## Removed

- Support for the legacy `fn __init__(...) -> Self:` form has been removed from
  the compiler, please switch to using `fn __init__(inout self, ...):` instead.

- The builtin `tensor` module has been removed. Identical functionality is
  available in `max.tensor`, but it is generally
  recommended to use structs from the `buffer`
  module when possible instead.

- Removed `String.unsafe_uint8_ptr()`. `String.unsafe_ptr()` now returns the
  same thing.

- Removed `StringLiteral.unsafe_uint8_ptr()` and `StringLiteral.as_uint8_ptr()`.

- Removed `SIMD.splat(value: Scalar[type])`. Use the constructor for `SIMD`
  instead.

- Removed the `SIMD.{add,mul,sub}_with_overflow()` methods.

- Removed the `SIMD.min()` and `SIMD.max()` methods. Identical functionality is
  available using the builtin [`min()`](/docs/std/math/math/min/) and
  [`max()`](/docs/std/math/math/max/) functions.

- Removed the Mojo Language Server warnings for unused function arguments.

- `Run Mojo File in Dedicated Terminal` action has been removed, and the
  action `Run Mojo File` will always open a dedicated terminal for each mojo
  file to guarantee a correct environment.

## Fixed

- Fixed a crash in the Mojo Language Server when importing the current file.

- Fixed crash when specifying variadic keyword arguments without a type
  expression in `def` functions, e.g.:

  ```mojo
  def foo(**kwargs): ...  # now works
  ```

- Mojo now prints `ref` arguments and results in generated documentation
  correctly.

- [#1734](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1734) - Calling
  `__copyinit__` on self causes crash.

- [#3142](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3142) - [QoI] Confusing
  `__setitem__` method is failing with a "must be mutable" error.

- [#248](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/248) - [Feature] Enable
  `__setitem__` to take variadic arguments

- [#3065](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3065) - Fix incorrect
  behavior of `SIMD.__int__` on unsigned types

- [#3045](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3045) - Disable implicit
  SIMD conversion routes through `Bool`

- [#3126](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3126) - [BUG] List doesn't
  work at compile time.

- [#3237](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3237) - [BUG] Difference
  between `__getitem__` and `[.]` operator.

- [#3336](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3336) - Fix outdated
  references to `let` in REPL documentation.

- The VS Code extension no longer caches the information of the selected
  MAX SDK, which was causing issues upon changes in the SDK.

- The Mojo debugger now stops showing spurious warnings when parsing closures.

## Special thanks

Special thanks to our community contributors:
[@jjvraw](https://github.com/jjvraw),
[@artemiogr97](https://github.com/artemiogr97),
[@martinvuyk](https://github.com/martinvuyk),
[@jayzhan211](https://github.com/jayzhan211),
[@bgreni](https://github.com/bgreni), [@mzaks](https://github.com/mzaks),
[@msaelices](https://github.com/msaelices),
[@rd4com](https://github.com/rd4com), [@jiex-liu](https://github.com/jiex-liu),
[@kszucs](https://github.com/kszucs),
[@thatstoasty](https://github.com/thatstoasty)
