---
title: Mojo v0.2.1
date: 2023-09-07
---

The first versioned release of Mojo! 🔥

All earlier releases were considered version 0.1.

## 🔥 Legendary

- First release of the Mojo SDK!

  You can now develop with Mojo locally. The Mojo SDK is currently available
  for Ubuntu Linux systems, and support for Windows and macOS is coming soon.
  You can still develop from a Windows or Mac computer using a container or
  remote Linux system.

  The Mojo SDK includes the Mojo standard library and the [Mojo command-line
  interface](/docs/cli/) (CLI), which allows you to run, compile, and package
  Mojo code. It also provides a REPL programming environment.

  [Get the Mojo SDK!](https://developer.modular.com/download)

- First release of the
  [Mojo extension for VS Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=modular-mojotools.vscode-mojo).

  This provides essential Mojo language features in Visual Studio Code, such as
  code completion, code quick fixes, docs tooltips, and more. Even when
  developing on a remote system, using VS Code with this extension provides a
  native-like IDE experience.

## ⭐️ New

- A new `clobber_memory` function has been added to the
  [`benchmark`](/docs/std/benchmark/benchmark/) module.
  The clobber memory function tells the system to flush all memory operations
  at the specified program point. This allows you to benchmark operations
  without the compiler reordering memory operations.

- A new `keep` function has been added to the
  [`benchmark`](/docs/std/benchmark/benchmark/) module. The `keep`
  function tries to tell the compiler not to optimize the variable away
  if not used. This allows you to avoid compiler's dead code elimination
  mechanism, with a low footprint side effect.

- New `shift_right` and `shift_left` functions have been added to the
  [`simd`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/) module. They shift the elements in
  a SIMD vector right/left, filling elements with zeros as needed.

- A new `cumsum` function has been added to the
  [`reduction`](/docs/std/algorithm/reduction/) module that computes
  the cumulative sum (also known as scan) of input elements.

- Mojo Jupyter kernel now supports code completion.

## 🦋 Changed

- Extends `rotate_bits_left`, `rotate_left`, `rotate_bits_right`, and
  `rotate_right` to operate on Int values. The ordering of parameters has also
  been changed to enable type inference. Now it's possible to write
  `rotate_right[shift_val](simd_val)` and have the `dtype` and `simd_width`
  inferred from the argument. This addresses
  [Issue #528](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/528).

## 🛠️ Fixed

- Fixed a bug causing the parser to crash when the `with` statement was written
  without a colon.
  This addresses [Issue #529](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/529).

- Incorrect imports no longer crash when there are other errors at the top
  level of a module. This fixes [Issue
  #531](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/531).
