---
title: Mojo v24.2
date: 2024-03-28
---

## 🔥 Legendary

- The Mojo standard library is now open source! Check out the
  [README](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/mojo/stdlib/README.md)
  for everything you need to get started.

- Structs and other nominal types are now allowed to implicitly conform to
  traits. A struct implicitly conforms to a trait if it implements all the
  requirements for the trait. For example, any struct that implements the
  `__str__()` method implicitly conforms to `Stringable`, and is usable with
  the `str()` built-in function.

  ```mojo
  @value
  struct Foo:
      fn __str__(self) -> String:
          return "foo!"

  fn main():
      print(str(Foo())) # prints 'foo!'
  ```

  We still strongly encourage you to explicitly list the traits a struct
  conforms to when possible:

  ```mojo
  @value
  struct Foo(Stringable): ...
  ```

  Not only is this useful for documentation and for communicating intentions,
  but in the future, explicit conformance will be useful for features like
  default methods and extensions.

- Mojo's Python interoperability now supports passing keyword arguments to
  Python functions:

  ```mojo
  from python import Python

  def main():
      plt = Python.import_module("matplotlib.pyplot")
      plt.plot((5, 10), (10, 15), color="red")
      plt.show()
  ```

## Language changes

### ⭐️ New

- Mojo now has support for variadic keyword arguments, often referred to as
  `**kwargs`. This means you can now declare and call functions like this:

  ```mojo
  fn print_nicely(**kwargs: Int) raises:
    for key in kwargs.keys():
        print(key[], "=", kwargs[key[]])

   # prints:
   # `a = 7`
   # `y = 8`
  print_nicely(a=7, y=8)
  ```

  For more details (and a list of current limitations), see [Variadic keyword
  arguments](/docs/manual/functions#variadic-keyword-arguments) in the Mojo
  manual.

### 🦋 Changed or removed

- `let` declarations now produce a compile time error instead of a warning, our
  next step in
  [removing let declarations](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/mojo/proposals/remove-let-decls.md).
  The compiler still recognizes the `let` keyword for now in order to produce a
  good error message, but that will be removed in subsequent releases.

- Mojo now warns about unused values in both `def` and `fn` declarations,
  instead of completely disabling the warning in `def`s. It never warns about
  unused `object` or `PythonObject` values, tying the warning to these types
  instead of the kind of function they are unused in. This will help catch API
  usage bugs in `def`s and make imported Python APIs more ergonomic in `fn`s.

- For the time being, dynamic type values will be disabled in the language. For
  example, the following will now fail with an error:

  ```mojo
  var t = Int  # dynamic type values not allowed

  struct SomeType: ...

  takes_type(SomeType)  # dynamic type values not allowed
  ```

  We want to take a step back and (re)design type valued variables,
  existentials, and other dynamic features. This does not affect type valued
  **parameters**, so the following works as before:

  ```mojo
  alias t = Int  # still 🔥

  struct SomeType: ...

  takes_type[SomeType]()  # already 🔥

  >fn uses_trait[T: SomeTrait](value: T): ... # still 🔥
  ```

- The `*_` expression in parameter expressions is now required to occur at the
  end of a positional parameter list, instead of being allowed in the middle.

  ```mojo
  # No longer supported
  alias FirstUnbound = SomeStruct[*_, 42]
  alias MidUnbound   = SomeStruct[7, *_, 6]
  # Still supported
  alias LastUnbound  = SomeStruct[42, *_]
  ```

  We narrowed this because we want to encourage type designers
  to get the order of parameters right, and want to extend `*_` to support
  keyword parameters as well in the future.

## Standard library changes

### ⭐️ New

- `DynamicVector` has been renamed to
  [`List`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/), and has moved from the
  `collections.vector` module to the `collections.list` module. In addition:

  - You can now construct a `List` from a variadic number of values. For
    example:

    ```mojo
    var numbers = List[Int](1, 2, 3)
    ```

  - `List` and
    [`InlinedFixedVector`](/docs/std/collections/inline_array/InlineArray/)
    types now support negative indexing. This means that you can write `vec[-1]`
    which is equivalent to `vec[len(vec)-1]`.

  - `List.push_back()` has been removed. Please use the `append()` function
    instead.

- The [`print()`](/docs/std/io/io/print/) function now takes `sep` and
  `end` keyword arguments. This means that you can write:

  ```mojo
  print("Hello", "Mojo", sep=", ", end="!!!\n") # prints Hello, Mojo!!!
  ```

  `sep` defaults to the empty string and `end` defaults to "\n".

  Also, the `print_no_newline()` function has been removed. Please use
  `print(end="")` instead.

- The [`FloatLiteral`](/docs/std/builtin/float_literal/FloatLiteral/) type is
  now an infinite-precision nonmaterializable type. This means you can do
  compile-time calculations using `FloatLiteral` without rounding errors. When
  materialized at runtime, a `FloatLiteral` value is converted to a
  [`Float64`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/).

  ```mojo
  # third is an infinite-precision FloatLiteral value
  alias third = 1.0 / 3.0
  # t is a Float64
  var t = third
  ```

- String types all conform to the
  [`IntableRaising`](/docs/std/builtin/int/IntableRaising/) trait. This means
  that you can now call `int("123")` to get the integer `123`. If the integer
  cannot be parsed from the string, then an error is raised.

- The `Tensor` type now has `argmax()` and `argmin()` functions to compute the
  position of the max or min value. Note: this should return a `Tensor[Int]` but
  currently the output tensor is the same type as the input tensor. This will be
  fixed in a future release.

- Added a new
  [`collections.OptionalReg`](/docs/std/collections/optional/OptionalReg/)
  type, a register-passable alternative to
  [`Optional`](/docs/std/collections/optional/Optional/).

- The [`ulp()`](/docs/std/math/math/ulp/) function has been added to the
  `math` module. This allows you to get the units of least precision (or units
  of last place) of a floating point value.

### 🦋 Changed

- The `simd_load()`, `simd_store()`, `aligned_simd_load()`, and
  `aligned_simd_store()` methods on
  [`DTypePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/),
  `Buffer`, and `NDBuffer` have been merged into
  a more expressive set of `load()` and `store()` methods with keyword-only
  `width` and `alignment` parameters:

  ```mojo
  # Doesn't work
  my_simd = my_buffer.simd_load[simd_width](index)
  # Works
  my_simd = my_buffer.load[width=simd_width](index)
  # Doesn't work
  my_buffer.aligned_simd_store[width, alignment](my_simd)
  # Works
  my_buffer.store[width=width, alignment=alignment](my_simd)
  ```

- The
  `EqualityComparable`
  trait now requires the `__ne__()` method for conformance in addition to the
  previously required `__eq__()` method.

- Many types now declare conformance to `EqualityComparable` trait.

- [`StaticTuple`](/docs/std/utils/static_tuple/StaticTuple/) parameter order
  has changed to `StaticTuple[type, size]` for consistency with `SIMD` and
  similar collection types.

- The signature of the
  [`elementwise()`](/docs/std/algorithm/functional/elementwise/) function has
  been changed. The new order is `function`, `simd_width`, and then `rank`.
  As a result, the rank parameter can now be inferred and one can call
  `elementwise()` without it:

  ```mojo
  elementwise[func, simd_width](shape)
  ```

- `PythonObject` is now register-passable.

- `PythonObject.__iter__()` now works correctly on more types of iterable Python
  objects. Attempting to iterate over non-iterable objects will now raise an
  exception instead of behaving as if iterating over an empty sequence.
  `__iter__()` also now borrows `self` rather than requiring `inout`, allowing
  code like:

  ```mojo
  for value in my_dict.values():
    ...
  ```

### 🚚 Moved

- We took the opportunity to rehome some modules into their correct package
  as we were going through the process of open-sourcing the Mojo standard
  library. Specifically, the following are some breaking changes worth
  calling out. Please update your import statements accordingly.

  - `Buffer`, `NDBuffer`, and friends have moved
    from the `memory` package into a new `buffer` package.

    ```mojo
    from buffer import Buffer, NDBuffer
    ```

  - `utils.list`, including the [`Dim`](/docs/std/buffer/dimlist/Dim/) and
    [`DimList`](/docs/std/buffer/dimlist/DimList/) types, has moved to
    the `buffer` package.

    ```mojo
    from buffer import Dim, DimList
    ```

  - The [`parallel_memcpy()`](/docs/std/algorithm/memory/parallel_memcpy/)
    function has moved from the `memory` package into the `buffer` package.

    ```mojo
    from buffer import parallel_memcpy
    ```

  - The `rand()` and
    `randn()`
    functions from the
    `random` package that return a `Tensor` have moved to the `tensor` package.
    Note that the overloads that write to a `DTypePointer` remain in the
    `random` package.

    If you happen to be using both versions in the same source file, you can
    import them both using the `import as` syntax:

    ```mojo
    from tensor import rand
    from random import rand as rand_dt
    ```

  - The `trap()` function has been renamed to
    [`abort()`](/docs/std/os/os/abort/). It also has moved from the `debug`
    module to the `os` module.

    ```mojo
    from os import abort
    ```

  - The [`isinf()`](/docs/std/utils/numerics/isinf/) and
    [`isfinite()`](/docs/std/utils/numerics/isfinite/) methods have been moved
    from `math.limits` to the `math` module.

    ```mojo
    from math import ininf, isfinite
    ```

## Tooling changes

### ⭐️ New

- Docstring code blocks can now use `%#` to hide lines of code from
  documentation generation.

  For example:

  ```mojo
  var value = 5
  %# print(value)
  ```

  Will generate documentation of the form:

  ```mojo
  var value = 5
  ```

  Hidden lines are processed as if they were normal code lines during test
  execution. This allows for writing additional code within a docstring
  example that is only used to ensure the example is runnable/testable.

- The Mojo LSP server now allow you to specify additional search paths to use
  when resolving imported modules in a document. You can specify search paths
  on the command line, using the `-I` option, or you can add them to the
  `mojo.lsp.includeDirs` setting in the VS Code extension.

## Other changes

### ❌ Removed

- The `__get_address_as_lvalue` magic function has been removed. You can now
  get an LValue from a `Pointer` or `Reference` by using the dereference
  operator (`[]`):

  ```mojo
  var ptr: Pointer[MyRecord]
  ...
  # Doesn't work
  __get_address_as_lvalue(ptr.value) = MyRecord(3, 5)
  # Works
  ptr[] = MyRecord(3, 5)
  ```

- The type parameter for the `memcpy` function is now automatically inferred.
  This means that calls to `memcpy` of the form `memcpy[Dtype.xyz](...)` will
  no longer work and the user would have to change the code to `memcpy(...)`.

- The [`memcpy()`](/docs/std/memory/memory/memcpy/) overload that worked on
  `Buffer` types has been removed in favor of just overloads for
  [`Pointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/) and
  [`DTypePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/):

  ```mojo
  # Doesn't work
  memcpy(destBuffer, srcBuffer, count)
  # Works
  memcpy(destBuffer.data, srcBuffer.data, count)
  ```

- The functions `max_or_inf()`, `min_or_neginf()` have been removed from
  `math.limit`. These functions were only used by the SIMD type.

- As mentioned previously, the `print_no_newline()` function has been removed.
  Please use `print(end="")` instead.

### 🛠️ Fixed

- [#1362](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1362) - Parameter inference
  now recursively matches function types.
- [#951](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/951) - Functions that were
  both `async` and `@always_inline` incorrectly errored.
- [#1858](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1858) - Trait with
  parametric methods regression.
- [#1892](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1892) - Forbid unsupported
  decorators on traits.
- [#1735](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1735) - Trait-typed values
  are incorrectly considered equal.
- [#1909](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1909) - Crash due to nested
  import in unreachable block.
- [#1921](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1921) - Parser crashes
  binding `Reference` to lvalue with subtype lifetime.
- [#1945](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1945) -
  `Optional[T].or_else()` should return `T` instead of `Optional[T]`.
- [#1940](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1940) - Constrain
  `math.copysign` to floating point or integral types.
- [#1838](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1838) - Variadic `print`
  does not work when specifying `end=""`
- [#1826](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1826) - The `SIMD.reduce`
  methods correctly handle edge cases where `size_out >= size`.
