---
title: Mojo v25.3
date: 2025-05-06
---

## Highlights

- Parts of the Mojo standard library continue to be progressively open sourced!
  Packages that are open sourced now include:

  - [`algorithm`](/docs/std/algorithm/)
  - [`benchmark`](/docs/std/benchmark/)
  - `buffer`
  - [`compile`](/docs/std/compile/)
  - [`complex`](/docs/std/complex/)
  - [`gpu`](/docs/std/gpu/)
  - [`logger`](/docs/std/logger/)
  - [`runtime`](/docs/std/runtime/)
  - [`subprocess`](/docs/std/subprocess/)

  For more information, see the
  [Standard library reference](/docs/lib/#standard-library) and the
  [Standard library
  source](https://github.com/modular/modular/tree/main/mojo/stdlib).

- Parts of the MAX AI kernels library continue to be progressively open sourced!
  Packages that are open sourced now include:

  - [`layout`](/docs/layout/)
  - [`linalg`](/docs/kernels/linalg/)

  For more information, see the
  [MAX AI kernels library reference](/docs/lib/#max-ai-kernels-library) and the
  [MAX AI kernels
  source](https://github.com/modular/modular/tree/main/max/kernels).

- Trait compositions are now supported via the `&` syntax. A trait composition
  combines two traits into one logical trait whose constraint set is the union
  of the constraint sets of the two original traits. For more information, see
  [Trait compositions](/docs/manual/traits/#trait-compositions) in the Mojo
  Manual.

- String types in Mojo got several significant improvements. See
  [Standard library changes](#25-3-standard-library-changes) for details.

## Language changes {#25-3-language-changes}

- Mojo can now use
  [user-declared `__merge_with__()` dunder methods](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/mojo/proposals/custom-type-merging.md)
  to merge values when using different types in ternary operations. This has
  been adopted to allow pointers to work naturally with the ternary operator,
  for example `var x = one_pointer if cond else other_pointer`.

- Auto-parameterization now extends to struct metatypes. For example, this
  declaration `fn foo[M: type_of(StringLiteral[_])]` will auto-parameterize
  on the unbound parameter of `StringLiteral`.

- The Mojo compiler now warns about stores to values that are never used, e.g.:
  `x = foo(); x = bar()` will warn about the first assignment to `x` because
  it is overwritten. You can generally address this by deleting dead code, or
  by assigning to `_` instead: `_ = foo(); x = bar()`. You may also encounter
  this in variable declarations, e.g. `var x = 0; ...; x = foo()`. In this
  case, change the variable to being declared as uninitialized, e.g.
  `var x: Int`. You may also silence this warning entirely for a variable by
  renaming it to start with an underscore, e.g. `_x`.

- The Mojo compiler now warns about obsolete use of `mut self` in initializers,
  please switch over to `fn __init__(out self)` instead.

- `def` functions now require type annotations on arguments, and treat a missing
  return type as returning `None`. Previously these defaulted to the `object`
  type which led to a variety of problems. Support for `object` has been
  removed until we have time to investigate a proper replacement.

## Standard library changes {#25-3-standard-library-changes}

String types in Mojo got several significant improvements:

- The [`String`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/) type no longer
  copies data from
  [`StringLiteral`](/docs/std/builtin/string_literal/StringLiteral/) and
  [`StaticString`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/#aliases) since
  they are known-static-constant values. This allows us to make construction
  from these values be implicit, which improves ergonomics and performance
  together. It also implements the "small string optimization", which avoids
  heap allocation for common short strings. On a 64-bit system, `String` can
  hold up to 23 bytes inline. Its copy constructor is now O(1), performing
  string data copy lazily on mutation.

- The types
  [`StringSlice`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/) and
  [`StaticString`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/#aliases)
  are now part of the prelude, there is no need to import them anymore. These
  are useful for code that just needs a "view" of string data, not to own and
  mutate it.

- The [`StringLiteral`](/docs/std/builtin/string_literal/StringLiteral/) type
  has been moved to a more reliable "dependent type" design where the value of
  the string is carried in a parameter instead of a stored member. This defines
  away a category of compiler crashes when working with `StringLiteral` that
  involved attempting to manipulate a `StringLiteral` at run time. As a
  consequence of this change, many APIs should switch to using
  [`StaticString`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/#aliases) instead
  of `StringLiteral`. For more information on this "dependent type" design for
  literals, see the proposal,
  [Fixing Simple Literals in Mojo](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/mojo/proposals/fixing-simple-literals.md).

- `String` supports a new `String(unsafe_uninit_length=x)` constructor and
  `str.resize(unsafe_uninit_length=x)` for clients that want to allocate space
  that they intend to fill in with custom unsafe initialization patterns. The
  `String(ptr=x, length=y)` constructor has been removed.

- `String` supports working with legacy C APIs that assume null termination,
  but the details have changed: `String` is now no longer implicitly
  null-terminated, which means that it is incorrect to assume that
  `str.unsafe_ptr()` will return a null-terminated string. For that, use the
  `str.unsafe_cstr_ptr()` method. It now requires the string to be mutable in
  order to make null-termination lazy on demand. This improves performance for
  strings that are not passed to legacy APIs.

- The [`List`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/) type has been improved
  similarly to `String` to reduce inconsistency and enable power-user features,
  including removing adding `List(unsafe_uninit_length=x)` and
  `list.resize(unsafe_uninit_size=n)` methods avoid initialized memory that the
  caller plans to overwrite.

- [`Set`](/docs/std/collections/set/Set/) now conforms to the
  [`Copyable`](/docs/std/builtin/value/Copyable/) trait so you can store sets
  in other types of collections (for example, as values in a `Dict`).

- The following traits have been removed in favor of trait composition:
  `EqualityComparableCollectionElement`, `RepresentableCollectionElement`,
  `TestableCollectionElement`, `Testable`, `StringableIdentifiable`,
  `StringableCollectionElement`, `IntervalPayload`, `WritableCollectionElement`,
  `ComparableCollectionElement`, `BoolableCollectionElement`,
  `EqualityComparableWritableCollectionElement`,
  `EqualityComparableWritableCollectionElementNew`, `CollectionElementNew`,
  `WritableCollectionElementNew`.

  For example, you can replace `EqualityComparableCollectionElement` with
  `EqualityComparable & CollectionElement`. `StringableCollectionElement` was
  already deprecated and scheduled to be removed; it can be replaced with
  `Writable & CollectionElement`.

- The [`PythonObject`](/docs/std/python/python_object/PythonObject/) type is
  being reworked in preparation for some improvements to Mojo-Python
  interoperability:

  - Since virtually any operation on a `PythonObject` can raise, the
    `PythonObject` struct no longer implements the following traits:
    `ImplicitlyBoolable`, `ImplicitlyIntable`.

  - `PythonObject` is no longer implicitly constructible from tuple or list
    literals. For example, `var x : PythonObject = [1, 2, "foo"]` is no longer
    accepted. Instead, please use the new `Python.list()` and `Python.tuple()`
    factory methods. For example:

    ```mojo
    var x = Python.list(1, 2, "foo")
    ```

    (The `list()` and `tuple()` factory methods were originally added on
    `PythonObject`, but have been moved to the `Python` struct.)

    We hope to re-enable literal syntax in the future as the standard library
    matures.

  - `PythonObject.from_borrowed_ptr()` has been removed in favor of a
    constructor with a keyword-only `from_borrowed_ptr` argument.

  - The deprecated `PythonObject.to_float64()` method has been removed. Use the
    `Float64()` constructor, instead.

- [`Span`](/docs/std/memory/span/Span/) now has a `swap_elements()` method
  which takes two indices and swaps them within the span.

- [`Pointer`](/docs/std/memory/pointer/Pointer/) now has a `get_immutable()`
  method to return a new `Pointer` with the same underlying data but with an
  `ImmutableOrigin`.

- You can now forward a
  [`VariadicPack`](/docs/std/builtin/variadics/VariadicPack/) where all
  values are `Writable` to a writer using `WritableVariadicPack`:

  ```mojo
  from utils.write import WritableVariadicPack

  fn print_message[*Ts: Writable](*messages: *Ts):
      print("message:", WritableVariadicPack(messages), "[end]")

  x = 42
  print_message("'x = ", x, "'")
  ```

  ```text
  message: 'x = 42' [end]
  ```

  In this example the variadic pack is buffered to the stack in the `print` call
  along with the extra arguments, before doing a single syscall to write to
  stdout.

- [`debug_assert()`](/docs/std/builtin/debug_assert/debug_assert/) in AMD GPU
  kernels now behaves the same as on NVIDIA, printing the thread information and
  variadic args passed after the condition:

  ```mojo
  from gpu.host import DeviceContext

  fn kernel():
      var x = 1
      debug_assert(x == 2, "x should be 2 but is: ", x)

  def main():
      with DeviceContext() as ctx:
          ctx.enqueue_function[kernel](grid_dim=2, block_dim=2)
  ```

  Running `mojo run -D ASSERT=all [filename]` will output:

  ```text
  At /tmp/test.mojo:5:17: block: [0,0,0] thread: [0,0,0] Assert Error: x should be 2 but is: 1
  At /tmp/test.mojo:5:17: block: [0,0,0] thread: [1,0,0] Assert Error: x should be 2 but is: 1
  At /tmp/test.mojo:5:17: block: [1,0,0] thread: [0,0,0] Assert Error: x should be 2 but is: 1
  At /tmp/test.mojo:5:17: block: [1,0,0] thread: [1,0,0] Assert Error: x should be 2 but is: 1
  ```

- The
  [`constrained[cond, string]()`](/docs/std/builtin/constrained/constrained/)
  function now accepts multiple strings that are printed concatenated on
  failure, so you can use:

  ```mojo
  constrained[cond, "hello: ", String(n), ": world"]()
  ```

  This is more compile-time efficient and somewhat more ergonomic than using
  string concatenation.

- [`pathlib.Path.write_text()`](/docs/std/pathlib/path/Path/#write_text) now
  accepts a `Writable` argument instead of a `Stringable` argument. This makes
  the function more efficient by removing a String allocation.

- Added
  [`pathlib.Path.write_bytes()`](/docs/std/pathlib/path/Path/#write_bytes)
  which enables writing raw bytes to a file.

- Added
  [`os.path.split_extension()`](/docs/std/os/path/path/split_extension/) to
  split a path into its root and extension.

- Added [`os.path.is_absolute()`](/docs/std/os/path/path/is_absolute/) to
  check if a given path is absolute or not.

- One can now specify the consistency model used in atomic operations with the
  default being sequential consistency. The consistency models are defined in
  the `Consistency` struct.

- Added
  [`Variant.is_type_supported()`](/docs/std/utils/variant/Variant/#is_type_supported)
  method. ([PR #4057](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/4057)) Example:

  ```mojo
    def takes_variant(mut arg: Variant):
        if arg.is_type_supported[Float64]():
            arg = Float64(1.5)
    def main():
        var x = Variant[Int, Float64](1)
        takes_variant(x)
        if x.isa[Float64]():
            print(x[Float64]) # 1.5
  ```

- The `type` parameter of `SIMD` has been renamed to `dtype`.

- The `is_power_of_two(x)` function in the `bit` package is now a method on
  `Int`, `UInt` and `SIMD`.

- The `Pointer.address_of(...)` and `UnsafePointer.address_of(...)` functions
  have been deprecated. Please use the
  [`Pointer(to=...)`](/docs/std/memory/pointer/Pointer/#__init__) and
  [`UnsafePointer(to=...)`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#__init__)
  constructors instead. Conceptually, this is saying "please initialize a
  `Pointer` (a reference, if you will) to *some other address in memory*. In the
  future, these `address_of()` functions will be removed.

## Tooling changes {#25-3-tooling-changes}

- Fixed SIMD boolean display in debugger: SIMD boolean values now display
  correctly with proper bit extraction.

- Improved language server performance: The language server now avoids
  parsing more than it needs to, improving performance across the board.

- The Mojo compiler is now able to interpret all arithmetic operations from
  the `index` dialect that are used in methods of `Int` and `UInt` types.
  That allows users to finally compute constants at compile time:

  ```mojo
  alias a: Int = 1000000000
  alias b: Int = (5 * a) // 2
  ```

  Previously, the compiler would throw the error "cannot fold operation".

- Added a new `--emit-llvm` option to the `mojo build` command, which allows
  users to emit LLVM IR. When `--emit-llvm` is specified, the build process
  will: compile mojo code to LLVM IR, save the IR to a .ll file (using the same
  name as the input file), and print the IR to stdout for immediate inspection.

## Other changes

- The syntax for adding attributes to an `__mlir_op` is now limited to inherent
  attributes (those defined by the op definition). Most users will not need to
  attach other kinds of attributes, and this helps guard against typos and mojo
  code getting outdated when the dialect changes.

## Removed {#25-3-removed}

- The `SIMD.roundeven()` method has been removed from the standard library.
  This functionality is now handled by the
  [`round()`](/docs/std/math/math/round/) function.

- Error messages about the obsolete `borrowed` and `inout` keywords, as well as
  the obsolete `-> Int as name` syntax have been removed.

- The `object` type has been removed.

- `utils.numerics.ulp` has been removed. Use the
  [`ulp()`](/docs/std/math/math/ulp/) function from the `math` package
  instead.

- Several free functions that were deprecated in the 25.2 release have now been
  removed. This includes:

  - The `str` free function. Use the `String` constructor instead.
  - The `int` free function. Use the `Int` constructor instead.
  - The `bool` free function. Use the `Bool` constructor instead.
  - The `float` free function. Use the `Float64` constructor instead.

- Removed deprecated
  [`DeviceContext`](/docs/std/gpu/host/device_context/DeviceContext/) methods
  `copy_sync()` and `memset_sync()`.

- The `unroll()` utility has been removed. Use the
  [`@parameter for` construct](/docs/reference/decorators/parameter/#parametric-for-statement)
  instead.

  ```mojo
  from utils.loop import unroll

  # Before
  @always_inline
  @parameter
  fn foo[i: Int]():
      body_logic[i]()
  unroll[foo, iteration_range]()

  # After
  @parameter
  for i in range(iteration_range):
      body_logic[i]()
  ```

- The `InlinedString` type has been removed. Use `String` instead which now
  supports the Small String Optimization (SSO).

- The `AsBytes` trait has been removed.

## Fixed {#25-3-fixed}

- [#3510](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3510) - `PythonObject`
  doesn't handle large `UInt64` correctly.

- [#3847](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3847) - Count leading zeros
  can't be used on `SIMD` at compile time.

- [#4198](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4198) - Apple M4
  is not properly detected with `sys.is_apple_silicon()`.

- [#3662](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3662) - Code using
  `llvm.assume` cannot run at compile time.

- [#4273](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4273) -
  `count_leading_zeros` doesn't work for vectors with size > 1 at compile time.

- [#4320](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4320) - Intermittent
  miscompilation with bytecode imported traits.

- [#4281](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4281) - MAX does not support
  RTX 5000-series GPUs.

- [#4163](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4163) - Corner case in
  initializers.

- [#4360](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4360) - Fix constructor
  emission for parameterized types conforming to a trait composition.

- [#4362](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4362) - Function call with
  `IntLiteral` incorrectly eliminated despite side-effects.

- [#4431](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4431) - [BUG]
  Python.evaluate doesn't handle null termination correctly.

- [#4492](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/4492) - Fix
  `StringSlice.replace` seg fault.

## Special thanks

Special thanks to our community contributors:

[@auris](https://github.com/auris),
[@bgreni](https://github.com/bgreni),
[@christianbator](https://github.com/christianbator),
[@KamilGucik](https://github.com/KamilGucik),
[@kasmith11](https://github.com/kasmith11),
[@martinvuyk](https://github.com/martinvuyk),
[@ratulb](https://github.com/ratulb),
[@rd4com](https://github.com/rd4com),
[@sora](https://github.com/sora),
[@thatstoasty](https://github.com/thatstoasty), and
[@winding-lines](https://github.com/winding-lines).
