---
title: Mojo v24.6
date: 2024-12-17
---

## Highlights

Here's a brief summary of some of the major changes in this release, with more
detailed information in the following sections:

- The `inout` and `borrowed` argument conventions have been renamed to `mut`
  and `read`, respectively. A new `out` convention has been added for the `self`
  argument in constructors and for named results. See
  [Language changes](#24-6-language-changes) for details.

- `Lifetime` and related types in the standard library have been renamed to
  [`Origin`](/docs/std/builtin/type_aliases/Origin/) to better clarify that
  parameters of this type indicate where a reference is derived from, not the
  more complicated notion of where a variable is initialized and destroyed. As a
  consequence the `__lifetime_of()` operator is now named `__origin_of()`.

  There are also a number of other origin-related improvements in this release,
  including being able to specify a union of origins by listing multiple values
  in the `__origin_of()` operator or inside the `ref` origin specifier
  (`ref [a, b]`). For details, see [Language changes](#24-6-language-changes).

  For background information and rationale on the name change see
  [the proposal](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3623). For more
  information on origins, see
  [Lifetimes, origins and references](/docs/manual/values/lifetimes/) in the
  Mojo Manual.

- Implicit conversions are now opt-in using the
  [`@implicit`](/docs/reference/decorators/implicit/) decorator. See
  [Language changes](#24-6-language-changes) for details.

- The standard library has added several new types, including
  [`Deque`](/docs/std/collections/deque/Deque/) (a double-ended queue) and
  [`OwnedPointer`](/docs/std/memory/owned_pointer/OwnedPointer/) (safe,
  single-owner, non-nullable smart pointer). See
  [Standard library changes](#24-6-standard-library-changes)
  for details.

- The VS Code extension now supports setting data breakpoints and function
  breakpoints, and the Mojo LLDB debugger supports symbol breakpoints, such
  as `b main` or `b my_module::main`.

- We've made a number of improvement to how information is displayed in error
  messages, LSP, and generated API documentation. For details, see
  [Tooling changes](#24-6-tooling-changes).

- And we've added a number of new docs, including a brand new
  [Mojo tutorial](/docs/manual/get-started/), new pages on
  [operators and expressions](/docs/manual/operators/),
  [error handling](/docs/manual/errors/), and
  [pointers](/docs/manual/pointers/), and many smaller additions and
  improvements.

## Language changes {#24-6-language-changes}

- Argument convention changes:

  - The `inout` and `borrowed` argument conventions have been renamed to `mut`
    (for "mutate") and `read`, respectively. These verbs reflect what the callee
    can do to the argument value passed in by the caller, without requiring the
    programmer to know about advanced features like references.

    For information on Mojo's argument conventions, see
    [Argument conventions](/docs/manual/values/ownership/#argument-conventions)
    in the Mojo Manual.

  - The argument convention for the `self` argument in the `__init__()`,
    `__copyinit__()`, and `__moveinit__()` methods has been changed from `inout`
    to `out`, reflecting that a constructor method initializes its `self` value
    without reading from it. This also enables spelling the type of an
    initializer correctly, which was not supported before:

    ```mojo
    struct Foo:
        fn __init__(out self): pass

    fn test():
        # This works now
        var fnPtr : fn(out x: Foo)->None = Foo.__init__

        var someFoo : Foo
        fnPtr(someFoo)  # initializes someFoo.
    ```

    The previous `fn __init__(inout self)` syntax is still supported in this
    release of Mojo, but will be removed in the future. Please migrate to the
    new syntax.

  - Similarly, the spelling of named results has switched to use
    `out` syntax instead of `-> T as name`. Functions may have at most one named
    result or return type specified with the usual `->` syntax. `out` arguments
    may occur anywhere in the argument list, but are typically last (except for
    `__init__` methods, where they are typically first).

    ```mojo
    # This function has type "fn() -> String"
    fn example(out result: String):
      result = "foo"
    ```

    The parser still accepts the old syntax as a synonym for this, but that will
    eventually be deprecated and removed.

    This was [discussed extensively in a public
    proposal](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3623). For more
    information, see
    [Named results](/docs/manual/functions/#named-results) in the Mojo
    Manual.

- Single argument constructors now require the
  [`@implicit`](/docs/reference/decorators/implicit/) decorator to allow for
  implicit conversions. Previously you could define an `__init__` that takes a
  single argument:

  ```mojo
  struct Foo:
      var value: Int

      fn __init__(out self, value: Int):
          self.value = value
  ```

  And this would allow you to pass an `Int` in the position of a `Foo`:

  ```mojo
  fn func(foo: Foo):
      print("implicitly converted Int to Foo:", foo.value)

  fn main():
      func(Int(42))
  ```

  This can result in complicated errors that are difficult to debug. By default
  this implicit behavior is now turned off, so you have to explicitly construct
  `Foo`:

  ```mojo
  fn main():
      func(Foo(42))
  ```

  You can still opt into implicit conversions by adding the `@implicit`
  decorator. For example, to enable implicit conversions from `Int` to `Foo`:

  ```mojo
  struct Foo:
      var value: Int

      @implicit
      fn __init__(out self, value: Int):
          self.value = value
  ```

  For more information see [Constructors and implicit
  conversion](/docs/manual/lifecycle/life#constructors-and-implicit-conversion)
  in the Mojo Manual.

- Origin-related changes:

  - The `AnyLifetime` type (useful for declaring origin types as parameters) has
    has been renamed to [`Origin`](/docs/std/builtin/type_aliases/Origin/) and
    the `__lifetime_of()` operator renamed to `__origin_of()`.

  - `Origin` is now a complete wrapper around the MLIR origin type.

    - The `Origin.type` alias has been renamed to `_mlir_origin`. In parameter
      lists, you can now write just `Origin[..]`, instead of `Origin[..].type`.

    - `ImmutableOrigin` and `MutableOrigin` are now, respectively, just aliases
      for `Origin[False]` and `Origin[True]`.

    - `Origin` struct values are now supported in the origin specifier of a
      `ref [..]` argument.

    - Added `Origin.cast_from` for casting the mutability of an origin value.

  - `ref` arguments and results now allow for providing a memory value
    directly in the origin specifier, rather than requiring the use of
    `__origin_of()`. It is still fine to use `__origin_of()` explicitly though,
    and this is required when specifying origins for parameters (e.g. to the
    `Pointer` type). For example, this is now valid without `__origin_of()`:

    ```mojo
    fn return_ref(a: String) -> ref [a] String:
        return a
    ```

  - Various improvements to origin handling and syntax have landed, including
    support for the ternary operator and allowing multiple arguments in a `ref`
    specifier (which are implicitly unions). This enables expression of simple
    algorithms cleanly:

    ```mojo
    fn my_min[T: Comparable](ref a: T, ref b: T) -> ref [a, b] T:
      return a if a < b else b
    ```

    It is also nice that `my_min` automatically and implicitly propagates the
    mutability of its arguments, so things like `my_min(str1, str2) += "foo"` is
    valid.

  - `ref` function arguments without an origin clause are now treated as
    `ref [_]`, which is more syntactically convenient and consistent:

    ```mojo
    fn takes_and_return_ref(ref a: String) -> ref [a] String:
        return a
    ```

  - The `__type_of(x)` and `__origin_of(x)` operators are much more general now:
    they allow arbitrary expressions inside of them, allow referring to dynamic
    values in parameter contexts, and even allow referring to raising functions
    in non-raising contexts. These operations never evaluate their expression,
    so any side effects that occur in the expression are never evaluated at
    runtime, eliminating concerns about `__type_of(expensive())` being a
    problem.

  - The destructor insertion logic in Mojo is now aware that types that take an
    `MutableAnyOrigin` or `ImmutableAnyOrigin` as part of their signature could
    potentially access any live value that destructor insertion is tracking,
    eliminating a significant usability issue with unsafe APIs like
    [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/).
    Consider a typical example working with strings before this change:

    ```mojo
    var str = String(...)
    var ptr = str.unsafe_ptr()
    some_low_level_api(ptr)
    _ = str^  # OLD HACK: Explicitly keep string alive until here!
    ```

    The `_ = str^` pattern was formerly required because the Mojo compiler has
    no idea what "ptr" might reference. As a consequence, it had no idea that
    `some_low_level_api()` might access `str` and therefore thought it was ok to
    destroy the `String` before the call - this is why the explicit lifetime
    extension was required.

    Mojo now knows that
    [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/) may
    access the `MutableAnyOrigin` origin, and now assumes that any API that uses
    that origin could use live values. In this case, it assumes that
    `some_low_level_api()` might access `str` and because it might be using it,
    it cannot destroy `str` until after the call. The consequence of this is
    that the old hack is no longer needed for these cases!

  - Function types now accept an origin set parameter. This parameter represents
    the origins of values captured by a parameter closure. The compiler
    automatically tags parameter closures with the right set of origins. This
    enables lifetimes and parameter closures to correctly compose.

    ```mojo
    fn call_it[f: fn() capturing [_] -> None]():
        f()

    fn test():
        var msg = String("hello world")

        @parameter
        fn say_hi():
            print(msg)

        call_it[say_hi]()
        # no longer need to write `_ = msg^`!!
    ```

    Note that this only works for higher-order functions which have explicitly
    added `[_]` as the capture origins. By default, the compiler still assumes
    a `capturing` closure does not reference any origins. This will soon change.

- Infer-only parameters may now be explicitly bound with keywords, enabling
  some important patterns in the standard library:

  ```mojo
  struct StringSlice[is_mutable: Bool, //, origin: Origin[is_mutable]]: ...
  alias ImmStringSlice = StringSlice[is_mutable=False]
  # This auto-parameterizes on the origin, but constrains it to being an
  # immutable slice instead of a potentially mutable one.
  fn take_imm_slice(a: ImmStringSlice): ...
  ```

- The flag for turning on asserts has changed, e.g. to enable all checks:

  ```bash
  mojo -D ASSERT=all main.mojo
  ```

  The levels are:

  - `none`: all assertions off
  - `warn`: print assertion errors e.g. for multithreaded tests (previously `-D
    ASSERT_WARNING`)
  - `safe`: the default mode for standard CPU safety assertions
  - `all`: turn on all assertions (previously `-D MOJO_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS`)

  You can now also pass `Stringable` args to format a message, which will have
  no runtime penalty or IR bloat cost when assertions are off. Previously you
  had to:

  ```mojo
  x = -1
  debug_assert(
    x > 0, String.format_sequence(“expected x to be more than 0 but got: ”, x)
  )
  ```

  Which can't be optimized away by the compiler in release builds, you can now
  pass multiple args for a formatted message at no runtime cost:

  ```mojo
  debug_assert(x > 0, “expected x to be more than 0 but got: ”, x)
  ```

- Automatic parameterization of parameters is now supported. Specifying a
  parameterized type with unbound parameters causes them to be implicitly added
  to the function signature as infer-only parameters.

  ```mojo
  fn foo[value: SIMD[DType.int32, _]]():
    pass

  # Equivalent to
  fn foo[size: Int, //, value: SIMD[DType.int32, size]]():
    pass
  ```

- Mojo can now interpret simple LLVM intrinsics in parameter expressions,
  enabling things like `count_leading_zeros` to work at compile time:
  [Issue #933](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/933).

- Introduced the `@explicit_destroy` annotation, the `__disable_del` keyword,
  the `UnknownDestructibility` trait, and the `ImplicitlyDestructible` keyword,
  for the experimental explicitly destroyed types feature.

- Added associated types; we can now have aliases like `alias T: AnyType`,
  `alias N: Int`, etc. in a trait, and then specify them in structs that conform
  to that trait. For more information, see [Associated aliases for
  generics](/docs/manual/traits#associated-aliases-for-generics).

## Standard library changes {#24-6-standard-library-changes}

- Introduced a new [`Deque`](/docs/std/collections/deque/Deque/) (double-ended
  queue) collection type, based on a dynamically resizing circular buffer for
  efficient O(1) additions and removals at both ends as well as O(1) direct
  access to all elements.

  The `Deque` supports the full Python `collections.deque` API, ensuring that
  all expected deque operations perform as in Python.

  Enhancements to the standard Python API include `peek()` and `peekleft()`
  methods for non-destructive access to the last and first elements, and
  advanced constructor options (`capacity`, `min_capacity`, and `shrink`) for
  customizing memory allocation and performance. These options allow for
  optimized memory usage and reduced buffer reallocations, providing flexibility
  based on application requirements.

- The `Formatter` struct has been replaced with a
  [`Writer`](/docs/std/format/Writer/) trait to enable buffered IO,
  increasing print and file writing perf to the same speed as C. It's now more
  general purpose and can write any `Span[Byte]`. To align with this the
  `Formattable` trait is now named
  [`Writable`](/docs/std/format/Writable/), and the
  `String.format_sequence()` static method to initialize a new `String` has been
  renamed to
  [`String.write()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#write).
  Here's an example of using all of the changes:

  ```mojo
  from memory import Span

  @value
  struct NewString(Writer, Writable):
      var s: String

      # Writer requirement to write a Span of Bytes
      fn write_bytes(inout self, bytes: Span[Byte, _]):
          self.s._iadd[False](bytes)

      # Writer requirement to take multiple args
      fn write[*Ts: Writable](inout self, *args: *Ts):
          @parameter
          fn write_arg[T: Writable](arg: T):
              arg.write_to(self)

          args.each[write_arg]()

      # Also make it Writable to allow `print` to write the inner String
      fn write_to[W: Writer](self, inout writer: W):
          writer.write(self.s)


  @value
  struct Point(Writable):
      var x: Int
      var y: Int

      # Pass multiple args to the Writer. The Int and StringLiteral types call
      # `writer.write_bytes` in their own `write_to` implementations.
      fn write_to[W: Writer](self, inout writer: W):
          writer.write("Point(", self.x, ", ", self.y, ")")

      # Enable conversion to a String using `str(point)`
      fn __str__(self) -> String:
          return String.write(self)


  fn main():
      var point = Point(1, 2)
      var new_string = NewString(str(point))
      new_string.write("\n", Point(3, 4))
      print(new_string)
  ```

  ```output
  Point(1, 2)
  Point(3, 4)
  ```

- The `TypeIdentifiable` trait has been removed in favor of the new
  `get_type_name` utility in the `compile.reflection` module.

- Python interop changes:

  - Introduced
    `TypedPythonObject`
    as a light-weight way to annotate
    [`PythonObject`](/docs/std/python/python_object/PythonObject/) values with
    static type information. This design will likely evolve and change
    significantly.

    - Added `TypedPythonObject[Tuple].__getitem__()` for accessing the elements
      of a Python tuple.

  - Added
    [`Python.add_object()`](/docs/std/python/python/Python/#add_object), to
    add a named `PythonObject` value to a Python 'module' object instance.

  - Added
    [`Python.unsafe_get_python_exception()`](/docs/std/python/python/Python/#unsafe_get_python_exception),
    as an efficient low-level utility to get the Mojo `Error` equivalent of the
    current CPython error state.

  - Add
    [`PythonObject.from_borrowed_ptr()`](/docs/std/python/python_object/PythonObject/#from_borrowed_ptr),
    to simplify the construction of `PythonObject` values from CPython 'borrowed
    reference' pointers.

    The existing `PythonObject.__init__(PyObjectPtr)` should continue to be used
    for the more common case of constructing a `PythonObject` from a 'strong
    reference' pointer.

  - Support for multi-dimensional indexing and slicing for `PythonObject`
    (PR [#3549](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3549),
    PR [#3583](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3583)).

    ```mojo
    var np = Python.import_module("numpy")
    var a = np.array(PythonObject([1,2,3,4,5,6])).reshape(2,3)
    print((a[0, 1])) # 2
    print((a[1][::-1])) # [6 5 4]
    ```

    Note that the syntax, `a[1, ::-1]`, is currently not supported.

  - Added
    [`PythonObject.__contains__()`](/docs/std/python/python_object/PythonObject/#__contains__).
    ([PR #3101](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3101))

    Example usage:

    ```mojo
    x = PythonObject([1,2,3])
    if 1 in x:
        print("1 in x")
    ```

- Pointer related changes:

  - The [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/) type
    now has an `origin` parameter that can be used when the `UnsafePointer`
    points to a value with a known origin. This origin is propagated through the
    `ptr[]` indirection operation. This parameter and other `UnsafePointer`
    parameters (other than the type) are now keyword-only.

  - You can now index into `UnsafePointer` using `SIMD` scalar integral types:

    ```mojo
    p = UnsafePointer[Int].alloc(1)
    i = UInt8(1)
    p[i] = 42
    print(p[i])
    ```

  - Added a new [`OwnedPointer`](/docs/std/memory/owned_pointer/OwnedPointer/)
    type as a safe, single-owner, non-nullable smart pointer with similar
    semantics to Rust's
    [`Box<>`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/boxed/struct.Box.html) and C++'s
    [`std::unique_ptr`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/unique_ptr).
    ([PR #3524](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3524))

  - `Arc` has been renamed to
    [`ArcPointer`](/docs/std/memory/arc_pointer/ArcPointer/), for consistency
    with `OwnedPointer`.

  - [`ArcPointer`](/docs/std/memory/arc_pointer/ArcPointer/) now implements
    [`Identifiable`](/docs/std/builtin/identifiable/Identifiable/), and can be
    compared for pointer equivalence using `a is b`.

  - The `Reference` type has been renamed to
    [`Pointer`](/docs/std/memory/pointer/Pointer/): a memory safe complement
    to `UnsafePointer`. This change is motivated by the fact that `Pointer` is
    assignable and requires an explicit dereference with `ptr[]`. Renaming to
    `Pointer` clarifies that "references" means `ref` arguments and results, and
    gives us a model that is more similar to what the C++ community would
    expect.

    For an overview of Mojo's pointer types, see the new
    [Intro to pointers](/docs/manual/pointers/) page in the Mojo Manual.

  - A new
    [`as_noalias_ptr()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#as_noalias_ptr)
    method as been added to `UnsafePointer`. This method specifies to the
    compiler that the resultant pointer is a distinct identifiable object that
    does not alias any other memory in the local scope.

- Added the [`Floatable`](/docs/std/builtin/floatable/Floatable/) and
  [`FloatableRaising`](/docs/std/builtin/floatable/FloatableRaising/) traits
  to denote types that can be converted to a `Float64` value using the builtin
  `float` function. Made `SIMD` and `FloatLiteral` conform to the `Floatable`
  trait. ([PR #3163](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3163))

  ```mojo
  fn foo[F: Floatable](v: F):
    ...

  var f = float(Int32(45))
  ```

- The [`rebind()`](/docs/std/builtin/rebind/rebind/) standard library function
  now works with memory-only types in addition to
  `@register_passable("trivial")` ones, without requiring a copy. For more
  information, see
  [The `rebind()` builtin](/docs/manual/parameters/#the-rebind-builtin) in the
  Mojo Manual.

- Introduced the [`random.shuffle()`](/docs/std/random/random/shuffle/)
  function for randomizing the elements of a `List`.
  ([PR #3327](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3327))

  Example:

  ```mojo
  from random import shuffle

  var l = List[Int](1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
  shuffle(l)
  ```

- The [`Dict.__getitem__()`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/#__getitem__)
  method now returns a reference instead of a copy of the value (or raises).
  This improves the performance of common code that uses `Dict` by allowing
  borrows from the `Dict` elements.

- [`Slice.step`](/docs/std/builtin/builtin_slice/Slice/#fields) is now an
  `Optional[Int]`, matching the optionality of `slice.step` in Python.
  ([PR #3160](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3160))

- There is now a [`Byte`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/#aliases) alias to better
  express intent when working with a pack of bits.
  ([PR #3670](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3670)).

- Expanded [`os.path`](/docs/std/os/path/path/) with new functions:
  - `os.path.expandvars()`: Expands environment variables in a path
    ([PR #3735](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3735)).
  - `os.path.splitroot()`: Split a path into drive, root and tail.
  ([PR #3780](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3780)).

- Added a [`reserve()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#reserve)
  method and new constructor to the `String` struct to allocate additional
  capacity. ([PR #3755](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/3755)).

- A new
  [`StringLiteral.get[some_stringable]()`](/docs/std/builtin/string_literal/StringLiteral/#get)
  method is available. It allows forming a runtime-constant `StringLiteral` from
  a compile-time-dynamic `Stringable` value.

- [`Span`](/docs/std/memory/span/Span/) has moved from the `utils` module to
  the `memory` module.

- [`Span`](/docs/std/memory/span/Span/) now implements `__reversed__()`. This
  means that one can get a reverse iterator over a `Span` using
  `reversed(my_span)`. Users should currently prefer this method over
  `my_span[::-1]`.

- A new `AsBytes` trait has been added to
  enable taking a `Span[Byte]` from any type that implements `as_bytes()`.
  `String.as_bytes()` and `String.as_bytes_slice()` have been consolidated under
  `String.as_bytes()` to return a `Span[Byte]`. If you require a copy, you can
  convert the `Span` to a `List` with `List(my_string.as_bytes())`.

- [`StringSlice`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/) now
  implements `strip()`, `rstrip()`, and `lstrip()`.

- [`StringRef`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/) now
  implements `split()` which can be used to split a `StringRef` into a
  `List[StringRef]` by a delimiter. ([PR
  #2705](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2705))

- [`StringRef`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/) is now
  representable so `repr(StringRef("hello"))` will return `StringRef('hello')`.

- More things have been removed from the auto-exported set of entities in the
  `prelude` module from the Mojo standard library:
  - `UnsafePointer` has been removed. Please explicitly import it via
    `from memory import UnsafePointer`.
  - `StringRef` has been removed. Please explicitly import it via
    `from utils import StringRef`.

- Restored implicit copyability of [`Tuple`](/docs/std/builtin/tuple/Tuple/)
  and `ListLiteral`.

- The
  [aliases for C foreign function interface (FFI)](/docs/std/ffi/#aliases)
  have been renamed: `C_int` -> `c_int`, `C_long` -> `c_long` and so on.

- `Float32` and `Float64` are now printed and converted to strings with
  roundtrip guarantee and shortest representation:

  ```plaintext
  Value                       Old                       New
  Float64(0.3)                0.29999999999999999       0.3
  Float32(0.3)                0.30000001192092896       0.3
  Float64(0.0001)             0.0001                    0.0001
  Float32(0.0001)             9.9999997473787516e-05    0.0001
  Float64(-0.00001)           -1.0000000000000001e-05   -1e-05
  Float32(-0.00001)           -9.9999997473787516e-06   -1e-05
  Float32(0.00001234)         1.2339999557298142e-05    1.234e-05
  Float32(-0.00000123456)     -1.2345600453045336e-06   -1.23456e-06
  Float64(1.1234567e-320)     1.1235052786429946e-320   1.1235e-320
  Float64(1.234 * 10**16)     12340000000000000.0       1.234e+16
  ```

- The `StaticIntTuple` data structure in the `utils` package has been renamed to
  [`IndexList`](/docs/std/utils/index/IndexList/). The data structure now
  allows one to specify the index bitwidth of the elements along with whether
  the underlying indices are signed or unsigned.

- Added [`DLHandle.get_symbol()`](/docs/std/ffi/OwnedDLHandle/#get_symbol), for
  getting a pointer to a symbol in a dynamic library. This is more general
  purpose than the existing methods for getting function pointers.

## Tooling changes {#24-6-tooling-changes}

- The VS Code Mojo Debugger now has a `buildArgs` JSON debug configuration
  setting that can be used in conjunction with `mojoFile` to define the build
  arguments when compiling the Mojo file.

- The VS Code extension now supports a `Configure Build and Run Args` command
  that helps set the build and run args for actions file `Run Mojo File` and
  `Debug Mojo File`. A corresponding button appears in `Run and Debug` selector
  in the top right corner of a Mojo File.

- The VS Code extension now has the `mojo.run.focusOnTerminalAfterLaunch`
  setting, which controls whether to focus on the terminal used by the
  `Mojo: Run Mojo File` command or on the editor after launch.
  [Issue #3532](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3532).

- The VS Code extension now has the `mojo.SDK.additionalSDKs` setting, which
  allows the user to provide a list of MAX SDKs that the extension can use when
  determining a default SDK to use. The user can select the default SDK to use
  with the `Mojo: Select the default MAX SDK` command.

- The VS Code extension now supports setting
  [data breakpoints](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging#_data-breakpoints)
  as well as
  [function breakpoints](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging#_function-breakpoints).

- The Mojo LLDB debugger now supports symbol breakpoints, for example, `b main`
  or `b my_module::main`.

- Error messages that include type names no longer include inferred or defaulted
  parameters when they aren't needed. For example, previously Mojo complained
  about things like:

  ```plaintext
  ... cannot be converted from 'UnsafePointer[UInt, 0, _default_alignment::AnyType](), MutableAnyOrigin]' to 'UnsafePointer[Int, 0, _default_alignment[::AnyType](), MutableAnyOrigin]'
  ```

  it now complains more helpfully that:

  ```plaintext
  ... cannot be converted from 'UnsafePointer[UInt]' to 'UnsafePointer[Int]'
  ```

- Tooling now prints the origins of `ref` arguments and results correctly, and
  prints `self` instead of `self: Self` in methods.

- The Mojo Language Server and generated documentation now print parametric
  result types correctly, e.g. showing `SIMD[type, simd_width]` instead of
  `SIMD[$0, $1]`.

- Generated API documentation now shows the signatures for structs, and
  identifies `@register_passable` and `@register_passable("trivial")` types.

- The VS Code extension now allows cancelling the installation of its private
  MAX SDK.

- The VS Code extension now opens the Run and Debug tab automatically whenever
  a debug session starts.

- The `mojo debug --vscode` command now support the `--init-command` and
  `--stop-on-entry` flags. Execute `mojo debug --help` for more information.

- The Mojo LLDB debugger on VS Code now supports inspecting the raw attributes
  of variables that are handled as synthetic types, e.g. `List` from Mojo or
  `std::vector` from C++.

- The VS Code extension now allows selecting a default SDK when multiple are
  available.

## Removed

- The `UnsafePointer.bitcast()` overload for `DType` has been removed. Wrap your
  `DType` in a `Scalar[my_dtype]` to call the only overload of `bitcast()` now.

## Fixed

- Lifetime tracking is now fully field sensitive, which makes the uninitialized
  variable checker more precise.

- [Issue #1310](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1310) - Mojo permits
  the use of any constructor for implicit conversions

- [Issue #1632](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1632) - Mojo produces
  weird error when inout function is used in non mutating function

- [Issue #3444](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3444) - Raising init
  causing use of uninitialized variable

- [Issue #3544](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3544) - Known
  mutable `ref` argument are not optimized as `noalias` by LLVM.

- [Issue #3559](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3559) - VariadicPack
  doesn't extend the lifetimes of the values it references.

- [Issue #3627](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3627) - Compiler
  overlooked exclusivity violation caused by `ref [MutableAnyOrigin] T`

- [Issue #3710](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3710) - Mojo frees
  memory while reference to it is still in use.

- [Issue #3805](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3805) - Crash When
  Initializing !llvm.ptr.

- [Issue #3816](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3816) - Ternary
  if-operator doesn't propagate origin information.

- [Issue #3815](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3815) -
  [BUG] Mutability not preserved when taking the union of two origins.

- [Issue #3829](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3829) - Poor error
  message when invoking a function pointer upon an argument of the wrong origin

- [Issue #3830](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3830) - Failures
  emitting register RValues to ref arguments.

- The VS Code extension now auto-updates its private copy of the MAX SDK.

- The variadic initializer for `SIMD` now works in parameter expressions.

- The VS Code extension now downloads its private copy of the MAX SDK in a way
  that prevents `ETXTBSY` errors on Linux.

- The VS Code extension now allows invoking a mojo formatter from SDK
  installations that contain white spaces in their path.

## Special thanks

Special thanks to our community contributors:
[@soraos](https://github.com/soraros), [@jjvraw](https://github.com/jjvraw),
[@bgreni](https://github.com/bgreni),
[@thatstoasty](https://github.com/thatstoasty),
[@szbergeron](https://github.com/szbergeron),
[@rd4com](https://github.com/rd4com),
[@fknfilewalker](https://github.com/fknfilewalker),
[@gabrieldemarmiesse](https://github.com/gabrieldemarmiesse),
[@avitkauskas](https://github.com/avitkauskas), and
[@martinvuyk](https://github.com/martinvuyk).
