---
title: Mojo v24.3
date: 2024-05-02
---

## Ō£© Highlights

- `AnyPointer` was renamed to
  [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/) and is now
  Mojo's preferred unsafe pointer type. It has several enhancements, including:

  - The element type can now be any type: it doesn't require `Movable`.

  - Because of this, the `take_value()`, `emplace_value()`, and `move_into()`
    methods have been changed to top-level functions and renamed. The new
    functions are:

    - [`initialize_pointee_copy`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#init_pointee_copy)
    - [`initialize_pointee_move`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#init_pointee_move)
    - [`move_from_pointee()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#take_pointee)
    - [`move_pointee`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#move_pointee_into)

  - A new
    [`destroy_pointee()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#destroy_pointee)
    function runs the destructor on the pointee.

  - `UnsafePointer` can be initialized directly from a `Reference` with
    `UnsafePointer(someRef)` and can convert to a reference with
    `yourPointer[]`. Both infer element type and address space. Note that when
    you convert a pointer to a reference, there's no way for Mojo to track the
    lifetime of the original value. So the resulting reference is no safer than
    the original pointer.

- All of the pointer types received some cleanup to make them more consistent,
  for example the `unsafe.bitcast()` global function is now a consistent
  [`bitcast()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#bitcast) method
  on the pointers, which can convert element type and address space.

- Improvements to variadic arguments support.

  - Heterogeneous variadic pack arguments now work reliably even with memory
    types, and have a more convenient API to use, as defined by the
    [`VariadicPack`](/docs/std/builtin/variadics/VariadicPack/) type. For
    example, a simplified version of `print` can be implemented like this:

    ```mojo
    fn print[T: Stringable, *Ts: Stringable](first: T, *rest: *Ts):
        print_string(str(first))

        @parameter
        fn print_elt[T: Stringable](a: T):
            print_string(" ")
            print_string(a)
        rest.each[print_elt]()
    ```

  - Mojo now supports declaring functions that have both optional and variadic
    arguments, both positional and keyword-only. For example, this now works:

    ```mojo
    fn variadic_arg_after_default(
      a: Int, b: Int = 3, *args: Int, c: Int, d: Int = 1, **kwargs: Int
    ): ...
    ```

    Positional variadic parameters also work in the presence of optional
    parameters. That is:

    ```mojo
    fn variadic_param_after_default[e: Int, f: Int = 2, *params: Int]():
      pass
    ```

    Note that variadic keyword parameters are not supported yet.

  For more information, see
  [Variadic arguments](/docs/manual/functions/#variadic-arguments) in the Mojo
  Manual.

- The `mojo build` and `mojo run` commands now support a `-g` option. This
  shorter alias is equivalent to writing `--debug-level full`. This option is
  also available in the `mojo debug` command, but is already the default.

- Many new standard library APIs have been filled in, including many community
  contributions. Changes are listed in the standard library section.

- The Mojo Manual has a new page on [Types](/docs/manual/types/).

## Language changes

- Certain dunder methods that take indices (`__getitem__()`, `__setitem__()`,
  and `__refitem__()`) or names (`__getattr__()` and `__setattr__()`) can now
  take the index or name as a parameter value instead of an argument value. This
  is enabled when you define one of these methods with no argument other than
  `self` (for a getter) or `self` and the set value (for a setter).

  This enables types that can only be subscripted into with parameters, as well
  as things like the following example, which passes the attribute name as a
  parameter so that attribute names can be checked at compile time.

  ```mojo
  struct RGB:
     fn __getattr__[name: StringLiteral](self) -> Int:
         @parameter
         if name == "r":   return ...
         elif name == "g": return ...
         else:
             constrained[name == "b", "can only access with r, g, or b members"]()
             return ...

  var rgb = RGB()
  print(rgb.b) # Works
  print(rgb.q) # Compile error
  ```

- Mojo now allows users to capture the source location of code and call location
  of functions dynamically using the `__source_location()` and
  `__call_location()` functions. For example:

  ```mojo
  from builtin._location import __call_location

  @always_inline
  fn my_assert(cond: Bool, msg: String):
      if not cond:
        var call_loc = __call_location()
        print("In", call_loc.file_name, "on line", str(call_loc.line) + ":", msg)

  fn main():
      my_assert(False, "always fails")  # some_file.mojo, line 193
  ```

  This prints "`In /path/to/some_file.mojo on line 193: always fails`". Note
  that `__call_location()` only works in `@always_inline` or
  `@always_inline("nodebug")` functions. It gives incorrect results if placed in
  an `@always_inline` function that's called *from* an
  `@always_inline("nodebug")` function.

  This feature is still evolving and for the time being you need to explicitly
  import these APIs, as shown above. In the future, these will probably be
  built-in functions and not require an import statement.

  Neither `__source_location()` nor `__call_location()` work when called in a
  parameter context. For example:

  ```mojo
  from builtin._location import __call_location

  @always_inline
  fn mystery_location() -> String:
      var loc = __call_location()
      return str(loc.file_name)

  def main():
      alias doesnt_work = mystery_location() # <unknown location in parameter context>
  ```

## Standard library changes

### ŌŁÉ’ĖÅ New

- [`List`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/) has several new methods:

  - `pop(index)` for removing an element at a particular index.
    By default, `List.pop()` removes the last element in the list.
    (@LJ-9801, fixes
    [#2017](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2017))

  - `resize(new_size)` for resizing the list without the need to
    specify an additional value.
    ([@mikowals](https://github.com/mikowals), fixes
    [#2133](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2133))

  - `insert(index, value)` for inserting a value at a specified index
    into the `List`. ([@whym1here](https://github.com/whym1here), fixes
    [#2134](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2134))

  - A new constructor `List(ptr, size, capacity)` to avoid needing to
    do a deep copy of an existing contiguous memory allocation when constructing
    a new `List`. ([@StandinKP](https://github.com/StandinKP), fixes
    [#2170](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2170))

- [`Dict`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/) now has a `update()` method to
  update keys/values from another `Dict`.
  ([@gabrieldemarmiesse](https://github.com/gabrieldemarmiesse))

- [`Set`](/docs/std/collections/set/Set/) now has named methods for set
  operations:
  - `difference()` mapping to `-`
  - `difference_update()` mapping to `-=`
  - `intersection_update()` mapping to `&=`
  - `update()` mapping to `|=`

  ([@arvindavoudi](https://github.com/arvindavoudi))

- `Dict`, `List`, and `Set` all conform to the `Boolable` trait. The collections
  evaluate to `True` if they contain any elements, `False` otherwise:

  ```mojo
  def list_names(names: List[String]):
      if names:
          for name in names:
              print(name[])
      else:
          print("No names to list.")
  ```

  ([@gabrieldemarmiesse](https://github.com/gabrieldemarmiesse))

- Added [`reversed()`](/docs/std/builtin/reversed/reversed/) function for
  creating reversed iterators. Several range types, `List`, and `Dict` now
  support iterating in reverse.

  ```mojo
  var numbers = List(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
  for number in reversed(numbers):
      print(number)
  ```

  ([@helehex](https://github.com/helehex) and
  [@jayzhan211](https://github.com/jayzhan211), contributes towards
  [#2325](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2325))

- [`Optional`](/docs/std/collections/optional/Optional/) now implements
  `__is__` and `__isnot__` methods so that you can compare an `Optional` with
  `None`. For example:

  ```mojo
  var opt = Optional(1)
  if opt is not None:
      print(opt.value()[])
  ```

  ([@gabrieldemarmiesse](https://github.com/gabrieldemarmiesse))

- [`Tuple`](/docs/std/builtin/tuple/Tuple/) now works with memory-only element
  types like `String` and allows you to directly index into it with a parameter
  expression. This means you can now simply use `x = tup[1]` like Python
  instead of `x = tup.get[1, Int]()`. You can also assign into tuple elements
  now as well with `tup[1] = x`.

  ```mojo
  var tuple = ("Green", 9.3)
  var name = tuple[0]
  var value = tuple[1]
  ```

  Note that because the subscript must be a parameter expression, you can't
  iterate through a `Tuple` using an ordinary `for` loop.

- The `Reference` type has several
  changes, including:

  - It has moved to the `memory.reference` module instead of `memory.unsafe`.
  - `Reference` now has an
    [`unsafe_bitcast()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#bitcast)
    method, similar to the pointer types.

  - Several unsafe methods were removed, including `offset()`,
    `destroy_element_unsafe()` and `emplace_ref_unsafe()`. This is because
    `Reference` is a safe typeŌĆöuse `UnsafePointer` to do unsafe operations.

- [`Bool`](/docs/std/builtin/bool/Bool/) can now be implicitly converted from
  any type conforming to the [`Boolable`](/docs/std/builtin/bool/Boolable/)
  trait. This means that you no longer need to write code like this:

  ```mojo
  @value
  struct MyBoolable:
    fn __bool__(self) -> Bool: ...

  fn takes_boolable[T: Boolable](cond: T): ...

  takes_boolable(MyBoolable())
  ```

  Instead, you can simply write:

  ```mojo
  fn takes_bool(cond: Bool): ...

  takes_bool(MyBoolable())
  ```

  Note that calls to `takes_bool()` will perform the implicit conversion, so in
  some cases is it still better to explicitly declare a type parameter, e.g.:

  ```mojo
  fn takes_two_boolables[T: Boolable](a: T, b: T):
    # Short circuit means `b.__bool__()` might not be evaluated.
    if a.__bool__() and b.__bool__():
      ...
  ```

- [`PythonObject`](/docs/std/python/python_object/PythonObject/) now conforms
  to the [`KeyElement`](/docs/std/collections/dict/#keyelement) trait, meaning
  that it can be used as key type for
  [`Dict`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/). This allows you to easily build
  and interact with Python dictionaries in Mojo:

  ```mojo
  def main():
      d = PythonObject(Dict[PythonObject, PythonObject]())
      d["foo"] = 12
      d[7] = "bar"
      d["foo"] = [1, 2, "something else"]
      print(d)  # prints `{'foo': [1, 2, 'something else'], 7: 'bar'}`
  ```

- [`FileHandle.seek()`](/docs/std/io/file/FileHandle/#seek) now has a
  `whence` argument that defaults to `os.SEEK_SET` to seek from the beginning of
  the file. You can now set to `os.SEEK_CUR` to offset by the current
  `FileHandle` seek position:

  ```mojo
  var f = open("/tmp/example.txt")
  # Skip 32 bytes
  f.seek(os.SEEK_CUR, 32)
  ```

  Or `os.SEEK_END` to offset from the end of file:

  ```mojo
  # Start from 32 bytes before the end of the file
  f.seek(os.SEEK_END, -32)
  ```

- [`FileHandle.read()`](/docs/std/io/file/FileHandle/#read) can now
  read straight into a
  [`DTypePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/):

  ```mojo
  var file = open("/tmp/example.txt", "r")

  # Allocate and load 8 elements
  var ptr = DTypePointer[DType.float32].alloc(8)
  var bytes = file.read(ptr, 8)
  print("bytes read", bytes)
  print(ptr.load[width=8]())
  ```

- The `sys` module now contains an `exit()` function that would exit a Mojo
  program with the specified error code.

  ```mojo
  from sys import exit

  exit(0)
  ```

- The constructors for `Tensor` have been changed to be more consistent. As a
  result, constructors take the shape as the first argument (instead of the
  second) when constructing a tensor with pointer data.

  If you pass a single scalar value to the `Tensor` constructor, it now
  broadcasts the value to all elements in the tensor. For example,
  `Tensor[DType.float32](TensorShape(2,2), 0)` constructs a `2x2` tensor
  initialized with all zeros. This provides an easy way to fill in the data of a
  tensor.

- [`String`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/) now has
  `removeprefix()` and `removesuffix()` methods.
  ([@gabrieldemarmiesse](https://github.com/gabrieldemarmiesse))

- The [`ord`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/ord/) and
  [`chr`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/chr/) functions have been
  improved to accept any Unicode character. ([@mzaks](https://github.com/mzaks),
  contributes towards [#1616](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1616))

- [`atol()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/atol/) now handles
  whitespace. The `atol()`function is used internally by `String.__int__()`, so
  `int(String( " 10 "))` now returns `10` instead of raising an error.
  ([@artemiogr97](https://github.com/artemiogr97))

- [`SIMD`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/) now implements the `__rmod__()`
  method. ([@bgreni](https://github.com/bgreni), fixes
  [#1482](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1482))

- [`bool(None)`](/docs/std/builtin/bool/bool-function/) is now implemented.
  (@zhoujingya)

- The [`DTypePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/) type
  now implements `gather()` for gathering a `SIMD` vector from offsets of a
  current pointer. Similarly, support for `scatter()` was added to scatter a
  `SIMD` vector into offsets of the current pointer.
  ([@leandrolcampos](https://github.com/leandrolcampos))

- The [`len()`](/docs/std/builtin/len/len/) function now handles a
  [`range()`](/docs/std/builtin/range/range/) specified with a negative end
  value, so that things like `len(range(-1))` work correctly.
  ([@soraros](https://github.com/soraros))

- [`debug_assert()`](/docs/std/builtin/debug_assert/debug_assert/) now prints
  its location (filename, line, and column where it was called) in its error
  message. Similarly, the `assert` helpers in the
  [`testing`](/docs/std/testing/testing/) module now include location
  information in their messages.

- The
  [`testing.assert_equal[SIMD]()`](/docs/std/testing/testing/assert_equal/)
  function now raises if any of the elements mismatch in the two `SIMD`
  arguments being compared.
  ([@gabrieldemarmiesse](https://github.com/gabrieldemarmiesse))

- The
  [`testing.assert_almost_equal()`](/docs/std/testing/testing/assert_almost_equal/)
  and [`math.isclose()`](/docs/std/math/math/isclose/) functions now have an
  `equal_nan` flag. When set to `True`, then NaNs are considered equal.

- The `object` type now supports the
  division, modulo, and left and right shift operators, including the in-place
  and reverse variants.
  (@LJ-9801, fixes
  [#2224](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2224))

- Added checked arithmetic operations for `SIMD` integers.

  `SIMD` integer types (including the sized integer scalars like `Int64`) can
  now perform checked additions, subtractions, and multiplications using the
  following new methods:

  - `add_with_overflow()`
  - `sub_with_overflow()`
  - `mul_with_overflow()`

  Checked arithmetic allows the caller to determine if an operation exceeded
  the numeric limits of the type. For example:

  ```mojo
  var simd = SIMD[DType.int8, 4](7, 11, 13, 17)
  var product: SIMD[DType.int8, 4]
  var overflow: SIMD[DType.bool, 4]
  (product, overflow) = simd.mul_with_overflow(simd)
  for i in range(len(product)):
    if overflow[i]:
            print("<overflow>")
        else:
            print(product[i])
  ```

  ([@lsh](https://github.com/lsh))

- Added [`os.remove()`](/docs/std/os/os/remove/) and
  [`os.unlink()`](/docs/std/os/os/unlink/) for deleting files.
  ([@artemiogr97](https://github.com/artemiogr97), fixes
  [#2306](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2306))

### ­¤”ŗ Changed

- The [`parallel_memcpy()`](/docs/std/algorithm/memory/parallel_memcpy/)
  function has moved from the `buffer` package to the `algorithm` package.
  Please update your imports accordingly.

- [`Optional.value()`](/docs/std/collections/optional/Optional/#value) now
  returns a reference instead of a copy of the contained value.

  To perform a copy manually, dereference the result:

  ```mojo
  var result = Optional(123)

  var value = result.value()[]
  ```

  ([@lsh](https://github.com/lsh), fixes
  [#2179](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2179))

- Per the accepted community proposal, [Standardize the representation of byte
sequence as a sequence of unsigned 8-bit
integers](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/mojo/proposals/byte-as-uint8.md),
began transition to using `UInt8` by changing the data pointer of `Error` to
`DTypePointer[DType.uint8]`.
([@gabrieldemarmiesse](https://github.com/gabrieldemarmiesse), contributes
towards [#2317](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2317))

- Continued transition to `UnsafePointer` from the legacy `Pointer` type
  in various standard library APIs and internals.
  ([@gabrieldemarmiesse](https://github.com/gabrieldemarmiesse))

## Tooling changes

- The behavior of `mojo build` when invoked without an output `-o` argument has
  changed slightly: `mojo build ./test-dir/program.mojo` now outputs an
  executable to the path `./program`, whereas before it would output to the path
  `./test-dir/program`.

- The `mojo package` command no longer supports the `-D` flag. All compilation
  environment flags should be provided at the point of package use (e.g.
  `mojo run` or `mojo build`).

- The REPL no longer allows type level variable declarations to be
  uninitialized, e.g. it will reject `var s: String`. This is because it does
  not do proper lifetime tracking (yet!) across cells, and so such code would
  lead to a crash. You can work around this by initializing to a dummy value
  and overwriting later. This limitation only applies to top level variables,
  variables in functions work as they always have.

## Other changes

### Low-level language changes

- A low-level `__get_mvalue_as_litref(x)` builtin was added to give access to
  the underlying memory representation as a `!lit.ref` value without checking
  initialization status of the underlying value. This is useful in very
  low-level logic but isn't designed for general usability and will likely
  change in the future.

- Properties can now be specified on inline MLIR ops:

  ```mojo
  _ = __mlir_op.`kgen.source_loc`[
      _type = (
          __mlir_type.index, __mlir_type.index, __mlir_type.`!kgen.string`
      ),
      _properties = __mlir_attr.`{inlineCount = 1 : i64}`,
  ]()
  ```

  As the example shows above, the protected `_properties` attribute can be
  passed during op construction, with an MLIR `DictionaryAttr` value.

### ŌØī Removed

- Support for "register only" variadic packs has been removed. Instead of
  `AnyRegType`, please upgrade your code to `AnyType` in examples like this:

  ```mojo
  fn your_function[*Types: AnyRegType](*args: *Ts): ...
  ```

  This move gives you access to a nicer API and has the benefit of being memory
  safe and correct for non-trivial types. If you need specific APIs on the
  types, please use the correct trait instead of `AnyType`.

- `List.pop_back()` has been removed. Use `List.pop()` instead which defaults
  to popping the last element in the list.

- `SIMD.to_int(value)` has been removed. Use `int(value)` instead.

- The `__get_lvalue_as_address(x)` magic function has been removed. To get a
  reference to a value use `Reference(x)` and if you need an unsafe pointer, you
  can use `UnsafePointer.address_of(x)`.

### ­¤øĀ’ĖÅ Fixed

- [#516](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/516) and
  [#1817](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1817) and many others, e.g.
  "Can't create a function that returns two strings."

- [#1178](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1178) (os/kern) failure (5).

- [#1609](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1609) alias with
  `DynamicVector[Tuple[Int]]` fails.

- [#1987](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1987) Defining `main`
  in a Mojo package is an error, for now. This is not intended to work yet,
  erroring for now will help to prevent accidental undefined behavior.

- [#1215](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1215) and
  [#1949](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1949) The Mojo LSP server no
  longer cuts off hover previews for functions with functional arguments,
  parameters, or results.

- [#1901](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1901) Fixed Mojo LSP and
  documentation generation handling of inout arguments.

- [#1913](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1913) - `0__` no longer
  crashes the Mojo parser.

- [#1924](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1924) JIT debugging on Mac
  has been fixed.

- [#1941](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1941) Mojo variadic
  arguments don't work with non-trivial register-only types.

- [#1963](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1963) `a!=0` is now parsed
  and formatted correctly by `mojo format`.

- [#1676](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1676) Fix a crash related to
  `@value` decorator and structs with empty body.

- [#1917](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1917) Fix a crash after
  syntax error during tuple creation.

- [#2006](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2006) The Mojo LSP now
  properly supports signature types with named arguments and parameters.

- [#2007](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2007) and
  [#1997](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1997) The Mojo LSP no longer
  crashes on certain types of closures.

- [#1675](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1675) Ensure `@value`
  decorator fails gracefully after duplicate field error.

- [#2068](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2068)
  Fix `SIMD.reduce()` for size_out == 2.
  ([@soraros](https://github.com/soraros))
