---
title: Mojo v24.4
date: 2024-06-07
---

## Highlights

Big themes for this release:

- Improvements to the performance and ease-of-use for `def` functions.

- Continued unification of standard library APIs around the `UnsafePointer`
  type.

- Many quality-of-life improvements for the standard library collection types.

- Significant performance improvements when inserting into a `Dict`. Performance
  on this metric is still not where we'd like it to be, but it is much improved.

- A new `@parameter for` mechanism for expressing compile-time loops, which
  replaces the earlier (and less reliable) `@unroll` decorator.

- New Mojo Manual pages on [Control flow](/docs/manual/control-flow/),
  [Testing](/docs/tools/testing/) and using
  [unsafe pointers](/docs/manual/pointers/unsafe-pointers/).

## Language changes

- Mojo has changed how `def` function arguments are processed. Previously, by
  default, arguments to a `def` were treated according to the `owned`
  convention, which makes a copy of the value, enabling that value to be mutable
  in the callee.

  This could lead to major performance issues because of the proliferation of
  unnecessary copies. It also required you to declare non-copyable types as
  `borrowed` explicitly. Now Mojo takes a different approach: `def` functions
  take arguments as `borrowed` by default (consistent with `fn` functions) but
  will make a local copy of the value **only if the argument is mutated** in the
  body of the function.

  This improves consistency, performance, and ease of use.

- Implicit variable definitions in a `def` function are more flexible: you can
  now implicitly declare variables as the result of a tuple return, using
  `a,b,c = foo()`. For example:

  ```mojo
  def return_two(i: Int) -> (Int, Int):
    return i, i+1

  a, b = return_two(5)
  ```

  Implicit variable declarations can also now shadow global immutable symbols
  (such as module names and built-ins) without getting a compiler error.
  For example:

  ```mojo
  slice = foo()
  ```

- Mojo functions can return an auto-dereferenced reference to storage with a
  new `ref` keyword in the result type specifier. For example:

  ```mojo
  @value
  struct Pair:
      var first: Int
      var second: Int

      fn get_first_ref(inout self) -> ref [self] Int:
          return self.first

  fn show_mutation():
      var somePair = Pair(5, 6)
      somePair.get_first_ref() = 1
    ```

  This approach provides a general way to return an "automatically dereferenced"
  reference of a given type. Notably, this eliminates the need for
  `__refitem__()` to exist. `__refitem__()` has thus been removed and replaced
  with `__getitem__()` that returns a reference.

- Mojo added support for *infer-only parameters*. Infer-only parameters must
  appear at the beginning of the parameter list and cannot be explicitly
  specified by the user. They are declared to the left of a `//` marker, much
  like positional-only parameters. This allows programmers to define functions
  with dependent parameters to be called without the caller specifying all the
  necessary parameters. For example:

  ```mojo
  fn parameter_simd[dt: DType, //, value: Scalar[dt]]():
      print(value)

  fn call_it():
      parameter_simd[Int32(42)]()
  ```

  In the above example, `Int32(42)` is passed directly into `value`, the first
  parameter that isn't infer-only. `dt` is inferred from the parameter itself
  to be `DType.int32`.

  This also works with structs. For example:

  ```mojo
  struct ScalarContainer[dt: DType, //, value: Scalar[dt]]:
      pass

  fn foo(x: ScalarContainer[Int32(0)]): # 'dt' is inferred as `DType.int32`
      pass
  ```

  This should make working with dependent parameters more ergonomic. See
  [Infer-only parameters](/docs/manual/parameters/#infer-only-parameters) in the
  Mojo Manual.

- Mojo now allows functions overloaded on parameters to be resolved when forming
  references to, but not calling, those functions. For example, the following
  now works:

  ```mojo
  fn overloaded_parameters[value: Int32]():
      pass

  fn overloaded_parameters[value: Float32]():
      pass

  fn form_reference():
      alias ref = overloaded_parameters[Int32()] # works!
  ```

- Mojo now supports adding a `@deprecated` decorator on structs, functions,
  traits, aliases, and global variables. The decorator marks the attached
  declaration as deprecated and causes a warning to be emitted when the
  deprecated declaration is referenced in user code. The decorator requires a
  deprecation message, specified as a string literal.

  ```mojo
  @deprecated("Foo is deprecated, use Bar instead")
  struct Foo:
      pass

  fn outdated_api(x: Foo): # warning: Foo is deprecated, use Bar instead
      pass

  @deprecated("use another function!")
  fn bar():
      pass

  fn techdebt():
      bar() # warning: use another function!
  ```

- Mojo has introduced
  [`@parameter for`](/docs/reference/decorators/parameter/#parametric-for-statement),
  a new feature for compile-time programming. `@parameter for` defines a for
  loop where the sequence and the induction values in the sequence must be
  parameter values. For example:

  ```mojo
  fn parameter_for[max: Int]():
      @parameter
      for i in range(max)
          @parameter
          if i == 10:
              print("found 10!")
  ```

  Currently, `@parameter for` requires the sequence's `__iter__()` method to
  return a `_StridedRangeIterator`, meaning the induction variables must be
  `Int`. The intention is to lift these restrictions in the future.

- The `is_mutable` parameter of `Reference` and `AnyLifetime` is now a `Bool`,
  not a low-level `__mlir_type.i1` value.

  This improves the ergonomics of spelling out a
  `Reference` type explicitly.

- Mojo will now link to a Python dynamic library based on the Python on top of
  your search path: `PATH`. This enables you to activate a virtual environment
  like `conda` and have access to Python modules installed in that environment
  without setting `MOJO_PYTHON_LIBRARY`. Previously Mojo would find a
  `libpython` dynamic library on installation and put the path in
  `.modular/modular.cfg`, which could result in version conflicts if you
  activated a virtual environment of a different Python version.

- `AnyRegType` has been renamed to `__TypeOfAllTypes` and Mojo now forbids
  binding non-trivial register-passable types to `__TypeOfAllTypes`. This
  closes a major safety hole in the language. Please use `AnyType` for generic
  code going forward.

- The `let` keyword has been completely removed from the language. We previously
  removed `let` declarations but still provided an error message to users. Now,
  it is completely gone from the grammar.

## Standard library changes

- New traits and related features:

  - Added built-in [`repr()`](/docs/std/format/repr/repr/) function and
  `Representable` trait.
  ([PR #2361](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2361))

  - Added the [`Indexer`](/docs/std/builtin/int/Indexer/) trait to denote
    types that implement the `__index__()` method which allows these types to be
    accepted in common `__getitem__()` and `__setitem__()` implementations, as
    well as allow a new built-in
    [`index()`](/docs/std/builtin/int/index/)
    function to be called on them. Most standard library containers can now be
    indexed by any type that implements `Indexer`. For example:

    ```mojo
    @value
    struct AlwaysZero(Indexer):
        fn __index__(self) -> Int:
            return 0

    struct MyList:
        var data: List[Int]

        fn __init__(inout self):
            self.data = List[Int](1, 2, 3, 4)

        fn __getitem__[T: Indexer](self, idx: T) -> Int:
            return self.data[index(idx)]

    print(MyList()[AlwaysZero()])  # prints `1`
    ```

    Types conforming to the `Indexer` trait are implicitly convertible to Int.
    This means you can write generic APIs that take `Int` instead of making them
    take a generic type that conforms to `Indexer`. For example:

    ```mojo
    @value
    struct AlwaysZero(Indexer):
        fn __index__(self) -> Int:
            return 0

    @value
    struct Incrementer:
        fn __getitem__(self, idx: Int) -> Int:
            return idx + 1

    var a = Incrementer()
    print(a[AlwaysZero()])  # works and prints 1
    ```

    ([PR #2685](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2685))

  - Added traits allowing user-defined types to be supported by various built-in
    and math functions.

    <!-- rumdl-disable MD013 -->

    | Function                                       | Trait                                              | Required method |
    |------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|-----------------|
    | [`abs()`](/docs/std/math/math/abs/)            | [`Absable`](/docs/std/math/math/Absable/)          | `__abs__()`     |
    | [`pow()`](/docs/std/math/math/pow/)            | [`Powable`](/docs/std/math/math/Powable/)          | `__pow__()`     |
    | [`round()`](/docs/std/math/math/round/)        | [`Roundable`](/docs/std/math/math/Roundable/)      | `__round__()`   |
    | [`math.ceil`](/docs/std/math/math/ceil/)       | `math.Ceilable`                                    | `__ceil__()`    |
    | [`math.ceildiv`](/docs/std/math/math/ceildiv/) | `math.CeilDivable` <br/> `math.CeilDivableRaising` | `__ceildiv__()` |
    | [`math.floor`](/docs/std/math/math/floor/)     | `math.Floorable`                                   | `__floor__()`   |
    | [`math.trunc`](/docs/std/math/math/trunc/)     | `Truncable`                                        | `__trunc__()`   |

    {/* rumdl-enable MD013 */}

    Notes:

    - Conforming to the `Powable` trait also means that the type can be used
      with the power operator (`**`).

    - For `ceildiv()`, structs can conform to either the `CeilDivable` trait
      or `CeilDivableRaising` trait.

    - Due to ongoing refactoring, the traits `Ceilable`, `CeilDivable`,
      `Floorable`, and `Truncable` do not appear in the API reference. They
      should be imported from the `math` module, except for `Truncable` which
      is (temporarily) available as a built-in trait and does not need to be
      imported.

    Example:

    ```mojo
    from math import sqrt

    @value
    struct Complex2(Absable, Roundable):
        var re: Float64
        var im: Float64

        fn __abs__(self) -> Self:
            return Self(sqrt(self.re * self.re + self.im * self.im), 0.0)

        fn __round__(self) -> Self:
            return Self(round(self.re, 0), round(self.im, 0))

        fn __round__(self, ndigits: Int) -> Self:
            return Self(round(self.re, ndigits), round(self.im, ndigits))

    ```

- Benchmarking:

  - The [`bencher`](/docs/std/benchmark/bencher/) module as part of the
    `benchmark` package is now public and documented. This module provides
    types such as `Bencher` which provides the ability to execute a `Benchmark`
    and allows for benchmarking configuration via the `BenchmarkConfig` struct.

- [`String`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/) and friends:

  - **Breaking.** Implicit conversion to `String` is now removed for builtin
    classes/types. Use `str()` explicitly to convert to `String`.

  - Added
    [`String.isspace()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#isspace)
    method conformant with Python's universal separators. This replaces the
    `isspace()` free function from the `string` module. (If you need the old
    function, it is temporarily available as `_isspace()`. It now takes a
    `UInt8` but is otherwise unchanged.)

  - [`String.split()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#split) now
    defaults to whitespace and has Pythonic behavior in that it removes all
    adjacent whitespace by default.

  - [`String.strip()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#strip),
    [`lstrip()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#lstrip) and
    [`rstrip()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#rstrip) can now
    remove custom characters other than whitespace. In addition, there are now
    several useful aliases for whitespace, ASCII lower/uppercase, and so on.
    ([PR #2555](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2555))

  - `String` now has a
    [`splitlines()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#splitlines)
    method, which allows splitting strings at line boundaries. This method
    supports [universal
    newlines](https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-universal-newlines)
    and provides an option to retain or remove the line break characters. ([PR
    #2810](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2810))

  - `InlinedString` has been renamed to
    `InlineString`
    to be consistent with other types.

  - [`StringRef`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/) now
    implements
    [`strip()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/#strip),
    which can be used to remove leading and trailing whitespace. ([PR
    #2683](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2683))

  - `StringRef` now implements
    [`startswith()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/#startswith)
    and
    [`endswith()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/#endswith).
    ([PR #2710](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2710))

  - Added a new
    [`StringSlice`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/)
    type, to replace uses of the unsafe `StringRef` type in standard library
    code.

    `StringSlice` is a non-owning reference to encoded string data. Unlike
    `StringRef`, a `StringSlice` is safely tied to the lifetime of the data it
    points to.

    - Added new
      [`as_string_slice()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#as_string_slice)
      methods to `String` and `StringLiteral`.
    - Added `StringSlice` initializer from an `UnsafePointer` and a length in
      bytes.

  - Added a new
    [`as_bytes_slice()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#as_bytes_slice)
    method to `String` and `StringLiteral`, which returns a `Span` of the bytes
    owned by the string.

  - Continued transition to
    [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/) and
    unsigned byte type for strings:
    - Renamed `String._as_ptr()` to
      [`String.unsafe_ptr()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#unsafe_ptr),
      and changed return type to `UnsafePointer` (was `DTypePointer`).
    - Renamed `StringLiteral.data()` to
      [`StringLiteral.unsafe_ptr()`](/docs/std/builtin/string_literal/StringLiteral/#unsafe_ptr),
      and changed return type to `UnsafePointer` (was `DTypePointer`).
    - `InlineString.as_ptr()` has been renamed to
      `unsafe_ptr()`
      and now returns an `UnsafePointer[UInt8]` (was
      `DTypePointer[DType.int8]`).
    - `StringRef.data` is now an `UnsafePointer` (was `DTypePointer`) and
      [`StringRef.unsafe_ptr()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/#unsafe_ptr)
      now returns an `UnsafePointer[UInt8]` (was `DTypePointer[DType.int8]`).

- Other built-ins:

  - The `Slice.__len__()` function has been removed and
    [`Slice`](/docs/std/builtin/builtin_slice/Slice/) no longer conforms
    to the `Sized` trait. This clarifies the ambiguity of the semantics: the
    length of a slice always depends on the length of the object being sliced.
    Users that need the existing functionality can use the
    [`Slice.unsafe_indices()`](/docs/std/builtin/builtin_slice/Slice/#indices)
    method. This makes it explicit that this implementation does not check if
    the slice bounds are concrete or within any given object's length.

  - Added a built-in [`sort()`](/docs/std/builtin/sort/sort/) function for
    lists of elements that conform to the
    `ComparableCollectionElement`
    trait.([PR #2609](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2609))

  - `int()` can now take a string and a
    specified base to parse an integer from a
    string: `int("ff", 16)` returns `255`. Additionally, if a base of zero is
    specified, the string will be parsed as if it was an integer literal, with
    the base determined by whether the string contains the prefix `"0x"`,
    `"0o"`, or `"0b"`.
    ([PR #2273](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2273),
    fixes [#2274](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2274))

  - Added the [`bin()`](/docs/std/builtin/format_int/bin/) built-in function
    to convert integral types into their binary
    string representation.
    ([PR #2603](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2603))

  - Added the `atof()` built-in
    function, which can convert a `String` to a `float64`. ([PR
    #2649](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2649))

  - You can now use the built-in [`any()`](/docs/std/builtin/bool/any/) and
    [`all()`](/docs/std/builtin/bool/all/) functions to check for truthy
    elements in a collection. Because `SIMD.__bool__()` is now constrained to
    `size=1`, You must explicitly use these to get the truthy value of a SIMD
    vector with more than one element. This avoids common bugs around implicit
    conversion of `SIMD` to `Bool`.
    ([PR #2600](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2600))

    For example:

    ```mojo
      fn truthy_simd():
          var vec = SIMD[DType.int32, 4](0, 1, 2, 3)
          if any(vec):
              print("any elements are truthy")
          if all(vec):
              print("all elements are truthy")
    ```

  - `object` now implements all the bitwise
    operators.
    ([PR #2324](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2324))

  - [`Tuple`](/docs/std/builtin/tuple/Tuple/) now supports `__contains__()`.
    ([PR #2709](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2709)) For example:

    ```mojo
    var x = Tuple(1, 2, True)
    if 1 in x:
        print("x contains 1")
    ```

  - `ListLiteral` and `Tuple`
    now only require that element types be `Movable`. Consequently,
    `ListLiteral` and `Tuple` are themselves no longer `Copyable`.

  - Added new `ImmutableStaticLifetime` and `MutableStaticLifetime` helpers.

- [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/) and
  others:

  - Added new [`memcpy()`](/docs/std/memory/memory/memcpy/) overload for
    `UnsafePointer[Scalar[_]]` pointers.

  - Removed the `get_null()` method from `UnsafePointer` and other pointer
    types. Please use the default constructor instead: `UnsafePointer[T]()`.

  - Many functions returning a pointer type have been unified to have a public
    API function of `unsafe_ptr()`.

  - The `Tensor.data()` method has been renamed to `unsafe_ptr()`. The return
    type is still a `DTypePointer[T]`.

- Collections:

  - [`List`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/) now has an
    [`index()`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/#index) method that allows you
    to find the (first) location of an element in a `List` of
    `EqualityComparable` types. For example:

    ```mojo
    var my_list = List[Int](2, 3, 5, 7, 3)
    print(my_list.index(3))  # prints 1
    ```

  - `List` can now be converted to a `String` with a simplified syntax:

    ```mojo
    var my_list = List[Int](2, 3)
    print(my_list.__str__())  # prints [2, 3]
    ```

    Note that `List` doesn't conform to the `Stringable` trait yet so you cannot
    use `str(my_list)` yet.
      ([PR #2673](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2673))

  - `List` has a simplified syntax to call the
    [`count()`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/#count) method:
    `my_list.count(x)`.
    ([PR #2675](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2675))

  - `List()` now supports `__contains__()`, so you can now use lists with the
    `in` operator:

    ```mojo
    if x in my_list:
    ```

    ([PR #2667](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2667))

  - `List` now has an
    [`unsafe_get()`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/#unsafe_get) to get the
    reference to an element without bounds check or wraparound for negative
    indices. Note that this method is unsafe. Use with caution.
    [PR #2800](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2800)

  - Added a [`fromkeys()`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/#fromkeys) method
    to `Dict` to return a `Dict` with the specified keys and values.
    ([PR 2622](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2622))

  - Added a [`clear()`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/#clear) method to
    `Dict`. ([PR 2627](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2627))

  - `Dict` now supports [`reversed()`](/docs/std/builtin/reversed/reversed/)
    for its `items()` and `values()` iterators.
    ([PR #2340](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2340))

  - `Dict` now has a simplified conversion to `String` with `my_dict.__str__()`.
    Note that `Dict` does not conform to the `Stringable` trait so
    `str(my_dict)` is not possible yet.
    ([PR #2674](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2674))

  - `Dict` now implements [`get(key)`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/#get)
    and `get(key, default)` functions.
    ([PR #2519](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2519))

  - Added a temporary `__get_ref(key)` method to `Dict`, allowing you to get a
    `Reference` to a dictionary value.

  - Added a new
    [`InlineList`](/docs/std/collections/inline_array/InlineArray/) type, a
    stack-allocated list with a static maximum size. ([PR
    2587#](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2587))
    ([PR #2703](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2703))

  - Added a new [`Span`](/docs/std/memory/span/Span/) type for taking slices
    of contiguous collections. ([PR
    #2595](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2595))

- [`os`](/docs/std/os/os/) module:

  - The `os` module now provides functionality for adding and removing
    directories using [`mkdir()`](/docs/std/os/os/mkdir/) and
    [`rmdir()`](/docs/std/os/os/rmdir/).
    ([PR #2430](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2430))

  - Added the [`os.path.getsize()`](/docs/std/os/path/path/getsize/) function,
    which gives the size in bytes of the file identified by the path.
    ([PR 2626](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2626))

  - Added [`os.path.join()`](/docs/std/os/path/path/join/) function.
    ([PR 2792](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2792))

  - Added a new [`tempfile`](/docs/std/tempfile/tempfile/) module, with
    `gettempdir()` and `mkdtemp()` functions.
    ([PR 2742](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2742))

- [`SIMD`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/) type:

  - Added [`SIMD.shuffle()`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/#shuffle) with
    `IndexList` mask.
    ([PR #2315](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2315))

  - [`SIMD.__bool__()`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/#__bool__) is constrained
    such that it only works when `size` is `1`. For SIMD vectors with more than
    one element, use [`any()`](/docs/std/builtin/bool/any/) or
    [`all()`](/docs/std/builtin/bool/all/).
    ([PR #2502](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2502))

  - The [`SIMD.reduce_or()`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/#reduce_or) and
    [`SIMD.reduce_and()`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/#reduce_and) methods are
    now bitwise operations, and support integer types.
    ([PR #2671](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2671))

  - Added [`SIMD.__repr__()`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/#__repr__) to get
    the verbose string representation of `SIMD` types.
    ([PR #2728](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2728))

- [`math`](/docs/std/math/math/) package:

  - The `math.bit` module has been moved to a new top-level
    [`bit`](/docs/std/bit/bit/) module. The following functions in this
    module have been renamed:
    - `ctlz` -> `countl_zero`
    - `cttz` -> `countr_zero`
    - `bit_length` -> `bit_width`
    - `ctpop` -> `pop_count`
    - `bswap` -> `byte_swap`
    - `bitreverse` -> `bit_reverse`

  - The `math.rotate_bits_left()` and `math.rotate_bits_right()` functions have
    been moved to the `bit` module.

  - The `is_power_of_2()` function in the `math` module is now called
    `is_power_of_two()` and located in the `bit` module.

  - The `abs()`, `round()`, `min()`, `max()`, `pow()`, and `divmod()` functions
    have moved from `math` to `builtin`, so you no longer need to import these
    functions.

  - The `math.tgamma()` function has been renamed to
    [`math.gamma()`](/docs/std/math/math/gamma/) to conform with Python's
    naming.

  - The implementation of the following functions have been moved from the
    `math` module to the new [`utils.numerics`](/docs/std/utils/numerics/)
    module: `isfinite()`, `isinf()`, `isnan()`, `nan()`, `nextafter()`, and
    `ulp()`. The functions continue to be exposed in the `math` module.

  - [`math.gcd()`](/docs/std/math/math/gcd/) now works on negative inputs, and
    like Python's implementation, accepts a variadic list of integers. New
    overloads for a `List` or `Span`of integers are also added.
    ([PR #2777](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2777))

- Async and coroutines:

  - [`Coroutine`](/docs/std/builtin/coroutine/Coroutine/) now requires a
    lifetime parameter. This parameter is set automatically by the parser when
    calling an async function. It contains the lifetimes of all the arguments
    and any lifetime accesses by the arguments. This ensures that argument
    captures by async functions keep the arguments alive as long as the
    coroutine is alive.

  - Async function calls are no longer allowed to borrow non-trivial
    register-passable types. Because async functions capture their arguments but
    register-passable types don't have lifetimes (yet), Mojo is not able to
    correctly track the reference, making this unsafe. To cover this safety gap,
    Mojo has temporarily disallowed binding non-trivial register-passable types
    to borrowed arguments in async functions.

- Miscellaneous:

  - Added an [`InlineArray`](/docs/std/collections/inline_array/InlineArray/)
    type that works on memory-only types. Compare with the existing
    [`StaticTuple`](/docs/std/utils/static_tuple/StaticTuple/) type, which is
    conceptually an array type, but only works on `__TypeOfAllTypes`. ([PR
    #2294](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2294))

  - The [`base64`](/docs/std/base64/) package now includes encoding and
    decoding support for both the Base64 and Base16 encoding schemes.
    ([PR #2364](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2364))
    ([PR #2584](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2584))

  - The `take()` function in [`Variant`](/docs/std/utils/variant/Variant/) and
    [`Optional`](/docs/std/collections/optional/Optional/) has been renamed to
    `unsafe_take()`.

  - The `get()` function in `Variant` has been replaced by `__getitem__()`. That
    is, `v.get[T]()` should be replaced with `v[T]`.

  - Various functions in the `algorithm` module are now built-in functions. This
    includes `sort()`, `swap()`, and `partition()`. `swap()` and `partition()`
    will likely shuffle around as we're reworking our built-in `sort()` function
    and optimizing it.

- `infinity` and `NaN` are now correctly handled in
  [`testing.assert_almost_equal()`](/docs/std/testing/testing/assert_almost_equal/)
  and an `inf` function has been added to `utils/numerics.mojo`.
  ([PR #2375](https://github.com/modular/modular/pull/2375))

## Tooling changes

- Invoking `mojo package my-package -o my-dir` on the command line, where
  `my-package` is a Mojo package source directory, and `my-dir` is an existing
  directory, now outputs a Mojo package to `my-dir/my-package.mojopkg`.
  Previously, this had to be spelled out, as in `-o my-dir/my-package.mojopkg`.

- The Mojo Language Server now reports a warning when a local variable is
  unused.

- Several `mojo` subcommands now support a `--diagnostic-format` option that
  changes the format with which errors, warnings, and other diagnostics are
  printed. By specifying `--diagnostic-format json` on the command line, errors
  and other diagnostics will be output in a structured
  [JSON Lines](https://jsonlines.org) format that is easier for machines to
  parse.

  The full list of subcommands that support `--diagnostic-format` is as follows:
  `mojo build`, `mojo doc`, `mojo run`, `mojo package`, and `mojo test`.
  Further, the `mojo test --json` option has been subsumed into this new option;
  for the same behavior, run `mojo test --diagnostic-format json`.

  Note that the format of the JSON output may change; we don't currently
  guarantee its stability across releases of Mojo.

- A new `--validate-doc-strings` option has been added to `mojo` to emit errors
  on invalid doc strings instead of warnings.

- The `--warn-missing-doc-strings` flag for `mojo` has been renamed to
  `--diagnose-missing-doc-strings`.

- A new decorator, `@doc_private`, was added that can be used to hide a
  declaration from being generated in the output of `mojo doc`. It also removes
  the requirement that the declaration has documentation (for example, when used
  with `--diagnose-missing-doc-strings`).

- Debugger users can now set breakpoints on function calls in O0 builds even if
  the call has been inlined by the compiler.

- The Mojo Language Server now supports renaming local variables.

## Other changes

### Removed

- The `@unroll` decorator has been deprecated and removed. The decorator was
  supposed to guarantee that a decorated loop would be unrolled, or else the
  compiler would error. In practice, this guarantee was eroded over time, as
  a compiler-based approach cannot be as robust as the Mojo parameter system.
  In addition, the `@unroll` decorator did not make the loop induction variables
  parameter values, limiting its usefulness. Please see `@parameter for` for a
  replacement!

- The method `object.print()` has been removed. Since `object` now conforms to
  the `Stringable` trait, you can use `print(my_object)` instead.

- The following functions have been removed from the math module:
  - `clamp()`; use the new `SIMD.clamp()` method instead.
  - `round_half_down()` and `round_half_up()`; these can be trivially
    implemented using the `ceil()` and `floor()` functions.
  - `add()`, `sub()`, `mul()`, `div()`, `mod()`, `greater()`, `greater_equal()`,
    `less()`, `less_equal()`, `equal()`, `not_equal()`, `logical_and()`,
    `logical_xor()`, and `logical_not()`; Instead, users should rely directly on
    the corresponding operators (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`, `>`, `>=`, `<`, `<=`,
    `==`, `!=`, `&`, `^`, and `~`).
  - `identity()` and `reciprocal()`; users can implement these trivially.
  - `select()`; removed in favor of using `SIMD.select()` directly.
  - `is_even()` and `is_odd()`; these can be trivially implemented using bitwise
    `&` with `1`.
  - `roundeven()`; the new `SIMD.roundeven()` method now provides the identical
    functionality.
  - `div_ceil()`; use the new `ceildiv()` function.
  - `rotate_left()` and `rotate_right()`; the same functionality is available in
    the builtin `SIMD.rotate_{left,right}()` methods for `SIMD` types, and the
    `bit.rotate_bits_{left,right})()` methods for `Int`.
  - An overload of `math.pow()` taking an integer parameter exponent.
  - `align_down_residual()`; it can be trivially implemented using
    `align_down()`.
  - `all_true()`, `any_true()`, and `none_true()`; use `SIMD.reduce_and()` and
    `SIMD.reduce_or()` directly.
  - `reduce_bit_count()`; use the new `SIMD.reduce_bit_count()` directly.
  - `rint()` and `nearbyint()`; use `round()` or `SIMD.roundeven()` as
    appropriate.

- The `EvaluationMethod` has been removed from `math.polynomial` and Estrin's
  method is no longer available. This method was limited to degree 10 or less,
  underutilized, and its performance unclear. In the future, this might be
  reintroduced with an improved implementation if needed, when better
  performance benchmarking infrastructure is available. The default behavior of
  `math.polynomial.polynomial_evaluate()` is unchanged (Horner's method).

- The `math.bit.select()` and `math.bit.bit_and()` functions have been removed.
  The same functionality is available in the builtin `SIMD.select` and
  `SIMD.__and__()` methods, respectively.

- The `math.limit` module has been removed. The same functionality is available
  as follows:
  - `math.limit.inf()`: use `utils.numerics.max_or_inf()`
  - `math.limit.neginf()`: use `utils.numerics.min_or_neg_inf()`
  - `math.limit.max_finite()`: use `utils.numerics.max_finite()`
  - `math.limit.min_finite()`: use `utils.numerics.min_finite()`

- The `tensor.random` module has been removed. The same functionality is now
  accessible via the `Tensor.rand()` and `Tensor.randn()` static methods.

- The builtin `SIMD` struct no longer conforms to `Indexer`; users must
  explicitly cast `Scalar` values using `int`.

### Fixed

- [#1837](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1837) Fix self-referential
  variant crashing the compiler.
- [#2363](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2363) Fix LSP crashing on
  simple trait definitions.
- [#1787](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1787) Fix error when using
  `//` on `FloatLiteral` in alias expression.
- Made several improvements to dictionary performance. Dicts with integer keys
  are most heavily affected, but large dicts and dicts with large values
  will also see large improvements.
- [#2692](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/2692) Fix `assert_raises`
  to include calling location.

## Special thanks

Special thanks to our community contributors:

[@rd4com](https://github.com/rd4com),
@toiletsandpaper,
[@helehex](https://github.com/helehex),
[@artemiogr97](https://github.com/artemiogr97),
[@mikowals](https://github.com/mikowals),
[@kernhanda](https://github.com/kernhanda), [@lsh](https://github.com/lsh),
@LJ-9801,
[@YichengDWu](https://github.com/YichengDWu),
[@gabrieldemarmiesse](https://github.com/gabrieldemarmiesse),
[@fknfilewalker](https://github.com/fknfilewalker),
[@jayzhan211](https://github.com/jayzhan211),
[@martinvuyk](https://github.com/martinvuyk),
[@ChristopherLR](https://github.com/ChristopherLR),
[@mzaks](https://github.com/mzaks), [@bgreni](https://github.com/bgreni),
[@Brian-M-J](https://github.com/Brian-M-J),
[@leandrolcampos](https://github.com/leandrolcampos)
