---
title: Mojo v25.1
date: 2025-02-13
---

## Highlights

- The legacy `borrowed`/`inout` keywords and `-> T as foo` syntax are deprecated
  and now generate a compiler warning. Please move to `read`/`mut`/`out`
  argument syntax instead. See
  [Argument conventions](/docs/manual/values/ownership/#argument-conventions)
  in the Mojo Manual for more information.

- The `bool()`, `float()`, `int()`, and `str()` functions are deprecated and
  generate compiler warnings. Please use the `Bool()`, `Float64()`, `Int()`, and
  `String()` constructors instead. See [Standard library
  changes](#25-1-standard-library-changes) for more details.

- The standard library has many changes related to strings. The new
  [`Char`](/docs/std/collections/string/codepoint/Codepoint/) struct
  represents a single Unicode character, and includes several methods for
  categorizing character types. When iterating over the characters of a `String`
  with a `for` loop, you now should use the
  [`String.chars()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#chars) method
  to provide an iterator of `Char` values or the
  [`String.char_slices()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#char_slices)
  method to provide an iterator of
  [`StringSlice`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/)
  instances for each character. `StringRef` has been removed in favor of
  [`StringSlice`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/).
  And various functionality has moved from `String` and `StringLiteral` to the
  more general `StringSlice` type. See [Standard library
  changes](#25-1-standard-library-changes) for more details.

- You can now use [`SIMD`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/) constructors to cast
  existing `SIMD` values (including `Scalar` values) to a different type, though
  you can still use the [`SIMD.cast()`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/#cast)
  method to infer the size of the new vector. See [Standard library
  changes](#25-1-standard-library-changes) for more details.

## Language changes {#25-1-language-changes}

- The legacy `borrowed`/`inout` keywords and `-> T as foo` syntax now generate
  a warning. Please move to `read`/`mut`/`out` argument syntax instead. See
  [Argument conventions](/docs/manual/values/ownership/#argument-conventions)
  in the Mojo Manual for more information.

- Initializers are now treated as static methods that return an instance of
  `Self`. This means the `out` argument of an initializer is now treated the
  same as any other function result or `out` argument. This is generally
  invisible, except that patterns like `instance.__init__()` and
  `x.__copyinit__(y)` no longer work. Simply replace them with `instance = T()`
  and `x = y` respectively.

- The [`@value`](/docs/reference/decorators/value/) decorator now additionally
  derives an implementation of the `ExplicitlyCopyable` trait.
  This will ease the transition to explicit copyability requirements by default
  in the Mojo collection types.

- Indexing into a homogenous tuple now produces the consistent element type
  without needing a rebind:

  ```mojo
    var x = (1, 2, 3, 3, 4)
    var y : Int = x[idx]     # Just works!
  ```

- You can now overload positional arguments with a keyword-only argument, and
  keyword-only arguments with different names:

  ```mojo
    struct OverloadedKwArgs:
        var val: Int

        fn __init__(out self, single: Int):
            self.val = single

        fn __init__(out self, *, double: Int):
            self.val = double * 2

        fn __init__(out self, *, triple: Int):
            self.val = triple * 3

        fn main():
            OverloadedKwArgs(1)        # val=1
            OverloadedKwArgs(double=1) # val=2
            OverloadedKwArgs(triple=2) # val=6
  ```

  This also works with indexing operations:

  ```mojo
  struct OverloadedKwArgs:
    var vals: List[Int]

    fn __init__(out self):
        self.vals = List[Int](0, 1, 2)

    fn __getitem__(self, idx: Int) -> Int:
        return self.vals[idx]

    fn __getitem__(self, *, idx2: Int) -> Int:
        return self.vals[idx2 * 2]

    fn __setitem__(mut self, idx: Int, val: Int):
        self.vals[idx] = val

    fn __setitem__(mut self, val: Int, *, idx2: Int):
          self.vals[idx2 * 2] = val


  fn main():
      var x = OverloadedKwArgs()
      print(x[1])       # 1
      print(x[idx2=1])  # 2

      x[1] = 42
      x[idx2=1] = 84

      print(x[1])       # 42
      print(x[idx2=1])  # 84
  ```

- The `__disable_del x` operation has been tightened up to treat all fields of
  `x` as consumed by the point of the deletion, so it should be used after all
  the subfields are transferred or otherwise consumed (for example, at the end
  of the function), not before uses of the fields.

## GPU programming {#25-1-gpu-programming}

- The new [`gpu` package](/docs/std/gpu/) provides low-level programming
  constructs for working with GPUs. The Mojo `gpu` APIs allow you to manually
  manage interaction between the CPU host and GPU device, manage memory between
  devices, synchronize threads, and more. Currently the best way to use these
  APIs is from inside a
  [MAX custom operation](https://docs.modular.com/max/develop/custom-ops/).

  The following code example shows a GPU kernel written in Mojo:

  ```mojo
  from max.tensor import ManagedTensorSlice
  from gpu import thread_idx, block_dim, block_idx

  fn gpu_add_kernel(out: ManagedTensorSlice, x: ManagedTensorSlice[out.type, out.rank]):
      tid_x = thread_idx.x + block_dim.x * block_idx.x
      tid_y = thread_idx.y + block_dim.y * block_dim.y
      if tid_x < x.dim_size(0) and tid_y < x.dim_size(1):
          out[tid_x, tid_y] = x[tid_x, tid_y] + 1
  ```

  The example above includes only the actual kernel code that’s run on the GPU,
  not the code to define a custom operation or launch the kernel. For more
  complete examples, see
  [`vector_addition.mojo`](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/max/examples/custom_ops/kernels/vector_addition.mojo)
  and
  [`top_k.mojo`](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/max/examples/custom_ops/kernels/top_k.mojo).

- The [`layout` package](/docs/layout/) includes APIs for working with
  *layouts*, which describe the organization of a tensor (for example, row-major
  or column-major layout), and the
  [`LayoutTensor`](/docs/layout/layout_tensor/LayoutTensor/) type, which
  represents a tensor with a specified layout. The `layout` package can be used
  to build efficient tensor operations that run on a GPU.

  We’ll continue adding code examples and documentation for the `gpu` and
  `layout` packages in future releases.

## Standard library changes {#25-1-standard-library-changes}

- The builtin functions for converting values to different types have been
  deprecated for actual constructors:

  | **Before** | **After**   |
  |------------|-------------|
  | `bool()`   | `Bool()`    |
  | `float()`  | `Float64()` |
  | `int()`    | `Int()`     |
  | `str()`    | `String()`  |

  These functions were a workaround before Mojo had a way to distinguish between
  implicit and explicit constructors. For this release you'll get a deprecation
  warning, and in the next release they'll become compiler errors. You can
  quickly update your code by doing a `Match Case` and `Match Whole Word`
  search and replace for `int(` to `Int(` etc.

- [`String`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/) and friends:

  - Added [`Char`](/docs/std/collections/string/codepoint/Codepoint/) for
    representing and storing single Unicode characters.

    - `Char` implements
      `CollectionElement`,
      [`EqualityComparable`](/docs/std/builtin/comparable/#equalitycomparable),
      [`Intable`](/docs/std/builtin/int/Intable/), and
      `Stringable`.

    - `Char` provides methods for categorizing character types, including:
      [`Char.is_ascii()`](/docs/std/collections/string/codepoint/Codepoint/#is_ascii),
      [`Char.is_ascii_digit()`](/docs/std/collections/string/codepoint/Codepoint/#is_ascii_digit),
      [`Char.is_ascii_upper()`](/docs/std/collections/string/codepoint/Codepoint/#is_ascii_upper),
      [`Char.is_ascii_lower()`](/docs/std/collections/string/codepoint/Codepoint/#is_ascii_lower),
      [`Char.is_ascii_printable()`](/docs/std/collections/string/codepoint/Codepoint/#is_ascii_printable),
      [`Char.is_posix_space()`](/docs/std/collections/string/codepoint/Codepoint/#is_posix_space),
      [`Char.is_python_space()`](/docs/std/collections/string/codepoint/Codepoint/#is_python_space).

    - Added a `String()` constructor from `Char`.

    - `Char` can be converted to `UInt32` via
      [`Char.to_u32()`](/docs/std/collections/string/codepoint/Codepoint/#to_u32).

    - [`chr()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/chr/) will now abort if
      given a codepoint value that is not a valid `Char`.

  - `StringRef` has been removed in favor of
    [`StringSlice`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/).
    The two types are ABI compatible, and for the exact same behavior one can
    use `StaticString`, which is an alias to
    `StringSlice[StaticConstantOrigin]`.

  - Various functionality has moved from `String` and `StringLiteral` to the
    more general `StringSlice` type.

  - Added
    [`StringSlice.from_utf8()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/#from_utf8)
    factory method, for validated construction of a `StringSlice` from a buffer
    containing UTF-8 encoded data. This method will raise if the buffer contents
    are not valid UTF-8.

  - Added
    [`StringSlice.chars()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/#chars)
    which returns an iterator over `Char`s. This is a compliant UTF-8 decoder
    that returns each Unicode codepoint encoded in the string.

  - Added
    [`StringSlice.__getitem__(Slice)`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/#__getitem__)
    which returns a substring. Only step sizes of 1 are supported.

  - Several standard library functions have been changed to take `StringSlice`
    instead of `String`. This generalizes them to be used for any appropriately
    encoded string in memory, without requiring that the string be heap
    allocated. This includes:
    [`ascii()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/ascii/),
    [`atol()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/atol/),
    [`atof()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/atof/),
    [`b16decode()`](/docs/std/base64/base64/b16decode/),
    [`b16encode()`](/docs/std/base64/base64/b16encode/),
    [`b64decode()`](/docs/std/base64/base64/b64decode/),
    [`b64encode()`](/docs/std/base64/base64/b64encode/), and
    [`ord()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/ord/).

  - Added new
    [`String.chars()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#chars) and
    [`String.char_slices()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#char_slices)
    iterator methods, and deprecated the existing `String.__iter__()` method.

    Different use-cases may prefer iterating over the `Char`s encoded in a
    string, or iterating over subslices containing single characters. Neither
    iteration semantics is an obvious default, so the existing `__iter__()`
    method has been deprecated in favor of writing explicit iteration methods
    for the time being.

    Code of the form:

    ```mojo
    var s: String  = ...
    for c in s:
        # ...
    ```

    can be migrated to using the `.char_slices()` method:

    ```mojo
    var s: String = ...
    for c in s.char_slices():
        # ...
    ```

  - Added
    [`StringSlice.char_length()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/#char_length)
    method, to pair with the existing
    [`StringSlice.byte_length()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/#byte_length)
    method.

  - The
    [`String.__len__()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#__len__)
    and
    [`StringSlice.__len__()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/#__len__)
    methods now return the length of the string in bytes.

    Previously, these methods were documented to note that they would eventually
    return a length in Unicode codepoints. They have been changed to guarantee
    a length in bytes, since the length in bytes is how they are most often used
    today (for example, as bounds to low-level memory manipulation logic).
    Additionally, length in codepoints is a more specialized notion of string
    length that is rarely the correct metric.

    Users that know they need the length in codepoints can use the
    `str.char_length()` method, or `len(str.chars())`.

  - `StringSlice` now implements
    `Representable`, and that
    implementation is now used by `String.__repr__()` and
    `StringLiteral.__repr__()`.

  - `StringSlice` now implements
    [`EqualityComparable`](/docs/std/builtin/comparable/#equalitycomparable).

    Up until now, `StringSlice` has implemented a more general `__eq__()` and
    `__ne__()` comparison with `StringSlice` types that had arbitrary other
    origins. However, to satisfy `EqualityComparable`, `StringSlice` now also
    has narrower comparison methods that support comparing only with another
    `StringSlice` with the exact same origin.

  - The `String.write()` static method has moved to a `String()` constructor,
    and is now buffered. Instead of doing:

    ```mojo
    var msg = "my message " + String(x) + " " + String(y) + " " + String(z)
    ```

    Which reallocates the `String` you should do:

    ```mojo
    var msg = String("my message", x, y, z, sep=" ")
    ```

    Which is cleaner, and buffers to the stack so the `String` is allocated only
    once.

  - You can now pass any [`Writer`](/docs/std/format/Writer/) to
    `write_buffered()`:

    ```mojo
    from utils.write import write_buffered

    var string = String("existing string")
    write_buffered(string, 42, 42.4, True, sep=" ")
    ```

    This writes to a buffer on the stack before reallocating the `String`.

- Collections:

  - A new [`LinkedList`](/docs/std/collections/linked_list/LinkedList/) type
    has been added to the standard library.

  - Added
    [`Optional.copied()`](/docs/std/collections/optional/Optional/#copied) for
    constructing an owned `Optional[T]` from an `Optional[Pointer[T]]` by
    copying the pointee value.

  - Added [`Dict.get_ptr()`](/docs/std/collections/dict/Dict/#get_ptr) which
    returns an `Optional[Pointer[V]]`. If the given key is present in the
    dictionary, the optional will hold a pointer to the value. Otherwise, an
    empty optional is returned.

  - Added new [`List.extend()`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/#extend)
    overloads taking [`SIMD`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/) and
    [`Span`](/docs/std/memory/span/Span/). These enable growing a
    `List[Scalar[..]]` by copying the elements of a `SIMD` vector or
    `Span[Scalar[..]]`, simplifying the writing of some optimized SIMD-aware
    functionality.

- [`UnsafePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/) changes:

  - `UnsafePointer`'s `bitcast()` method has now been split into
    [`bitcast()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#bitcast) for
    changing the type,
    [`origin_cast()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#origin_cast)
    for changing mutability,
    [`static_alignment_cast()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#static_alignment_cast)
    for changing alignment, and
    [`address_space_cast()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#address_space_cast)
    for changing the address space.

  - `UnsafePointer` is now parameterized on mutability. Previously,
    `UnsafePointer` could only represent mutable pointers.

    The new `mut` parameter can be used to restrict an `UnsafePointer` to a
    specific mutability: `UnsafePointer[T, mut=False]` represents a pointer to
    an immutable `T` value. This is analogous to a `const *` pointer in C++.

  - [`UnsafePointer.address_of()`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/#address_of)
    will now infer the origin and mutability of the resulting pointer from the
    argument. For example:

    ```mojo
    var local = 10
    # Constructs a mutable pointer, because `local` is a mutable memory location
    var ptr = UnsafePointer.address_of(local)
    ```

    To force the construction of an immutable pointer to an otherwise mutable
    memory location, use a cast:

    ```mojo
    var local = 10
    # Cast the mutable pointer to be immutable.
    var ptr = UnsafePointer.address_of(local).origin_cast[mut=False]()
    ```

  - The `unsafe_ptr()` method on several standard library collection types have
    been updated to use parametric mutability: they will return an
    `UnsafePointer` whose mutability is inherited from the mutability of the
    `ref self` of the receiver at the call site. For example, `ptr1` will be
    immutable, while `ptr2` will be mutable:

    ```mojo
    fn take_lists(read list1: List[Int], mut list2: List[Int]):
        # Immutable pointer, since receiver is immutable `read` reference
        var ptr1 = list1.unsafe_ptr()

        # Mutable pointer, since receiver is mutable `mut` reference
        var ptr2 = list2.unsafe_ptr()
    ```

- New and updated traits:

  - The `ExplicitlyCopyable`
    trait has changed to require a `fn copy(self) -> Self` method. Previously,
    an initializer with the signature `fn __init__(out self, *, other: Self)`
    had been required by `ExplicitlyCopyable`.

    This improves the "greppability" and at-a-glance readability when a
    programmer is looking for places in their code that may be performing
    copies.

  - The `IntLike` trait has been removed and its functionality incorporated into
    the [`Indexer`](/docs/std/builtin/int/Indexer/) trait. This enables
    `SIMD` scalar integer types and `UInt` to be used for indexing into all of
    the collection types, as well as optimizing away normalization checks for
    `UInt` indexing.

  - The `ImplicitlyIntable` trait
    has been added, allowing types to be implicitly converted to an `Int` by
    implementing the `__as_int__()` method:

    ```mojo
    @value
    struct Foo(ImplicitlyIntable):
        var i: Int

        fn __as_int__(self) -> Int:
            return self.i
    ```

- You can now cast `SIMD` types using constructors:

  ```mojo
  var val = Int8(42)
  var cast = Int32(val)
  ```

  It also works when passing a scalar type to larger vector size:

  ```mojo
  var vector = SIMD[DType.int64, 4](cast) # [42, 42, 42, 42]
  ```

  For values other than scalars the size of the `SIMD` vector needs to be equal:

  ```mojo
  var float_vector = SIMD[DType.float64, 4](vector)
  ```

  [`SIMD.cast()`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/#cast) still exists to infer the
  size of new vector:

  ```mojo
  var inferred_size = float_vector.cast[DType.uint64]() # [42, 42, 42, 42]
  ```

- Added [`SIMD.from_bytes()`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/#from_bytes) and
  [`SIMD.as_bytes()`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/#as_bytes) to convert a
  list of bytes to a list of scalars and vice versa, accepting the endianness as
  an argument. Similar to Python `int.from_bytes()` and `int.to_bytes()`
  functions.

- You can now use [`max()`](/docs/std/math/math/max/) and
  [`min()`](/docs/std/math/math/min/) with variadic number of arguments.

- `bit_ceil()` has been renamed to
  [`next_power_of_two()`](/docs/std/bit/bit/next_power_of_two/), and
  `bit_floor()` to
  [`prev_power_of_two()`](/docs/std/bit/bit/prev_power_of_two/). This is to
  improve readability and clarity in their use.

- Added a new boolean `validate` parameter to
  [`b64decode()`](/docs/std/base64/base64/b64decode/).

- The [`b64encode()`](/docs/std/base64/base64/b64encode/) overload that
  previously took a `List` has been changed to take a
  [`Span`](/docs/std/memory/span/Span/).

- Removed the `@implicit` decorator from some standard library initializer
  methods that perform allocation. This reduces places where Mojo code could
  implicitly allocate where the user may not be aware.

  Removed `@implicit` from:

  - `String.__init__(out self, StringSlice)`
  - `List.__init__(out self, owned *values: T)`
  - `List.__init__(out self, span: Span[T])`

- Added more aliases in [`sys.ffi`](/docs/std/ffi/) to round out the
  usual needs for FFI bindings.

## Tooling changes {#25-1-tooling-changes}

- `mblack` (aka [`mojo format`](/docs/cli/format/)) no longer formats non-Mojo
  files. This prevents unexpected formatting of Python files.

- Full struct signature information is now exposed in the documentation
  generator, and in the symbol outline and hover markdown via the Mojo Language
  Server.

- The [`env_get_dtype()`](/docs/std/sys/param_env/env_get_dtype/) function has
  been added to the [`sys.param_env`](/docs/std/sys/param_env/) module. This
  allows you to get the value of a `DType` from the param environment.

## Removed

- `StringRef` has been removed. Use
  [`StringSlice`](/docs/std/collections/string/string_slice/StringSlice/)
  instead.

  - Changed [`sys.argv()`](/docs/std/sys/arg/argv/) to return list of
    `StringSlice`.

  - Added explicit [`Path()`](/docs/std/pathlib/path/Path/#__init__)
    constructor from `StringSlice`.

- The `Tuple.get[i, T]()` method has been removed. Please use `tup[i]` or
  `rebind[T](tup[i])` as needed instead.

- `StringableCollectionElement` is deprecated. Use `WritableCollectionElement`
  instead, which still allows you to construct a `String`, but can avoid
  intermediate allocations.

- The `IntLike` trait has been removed and its functionality incorporated into
  the [`Indexer`](/docs/std/builtin/int/Indexer/) trait.

- The `Type{field1: 42, field2: 17}` syntax for direct initializing register
  passable types has been removed. This was legacy syntax - to upgrade your
  code, add the [`@value`](/docs/reference/decorators/value/) decorator to your
  struct to get a fieldwise initializer and use `Type(field1=42, field2 = 17)`
  instead.

## Fixed

- The Mojo Kernel for Jupyter Notebooks is working again on nightly releases.

- The command `mojo debug --vscode` now sets the current working directory
  properly.

- [Issue #3796](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3796) - Compiler crash
  handling `for`-`else` statement.

- [Issue #3540](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3540) - Using named
  output slot breaks trait conformance

- [Issue #3617](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3617) - Can't generate
  the constructors for a type wrapping `!lit.ref`

- The Mojo Language Server doesn't crash anymore on empty `__init__.mojo` files.
  [Issue #3826](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3826).

- [Issue #3935](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3935) - Confusing OOM
  error when using `Tuple.get()` incorrectly.

- [Issue #3955](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3955) - Unexpected
  copy behavior with `def` arguments in loops

- [Issue #3960](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/3960) - Infinite `for`
  loop
