---
title: Mojo v0.6.0
date: 2023-12-04
---

## 🔥 Legendary

- Traits have arrived!

  You can now define a *trait*, which consists of a required set of method
  prototypes. A struct can *conform to* the trait by implementing these methods.
  This lets you write generic functions that work on any structs that conform to
  a given trait.

  The following section gives a brief overview of traits—see the
  [Mojo Manual](/docs/manual/traits/) and this
  [traits blog post](https://modul.ar/traits-blog) for more details!

  Traits are declared with the `trait` keyword. The bodies of traits should
  contain method signatures declared with `...` as their bodies. Default
  method implementations are not supported yet.

  ```mojo
  trait SomeTrait:
      fn required_method(self, x: Int): ...
  ```

  The trait can be implemented on a struct by inheriting from it.

  ```mojo
  struct SomeStruct(SomeTrait):
      fn required_method(self, x: Int):
          print("hello traits", x)
  ```

  You can then write a generic functions that accepts any type that conforms to
  the trait. You do this by creating a parameterized function with a
  trait-typed parameter:

  ```mojo
  fn fun_with_traits[T: SomeTrait](x: T):
      x.required_method(42)
  ```

  Which can be invoked with instances of types that conform to the trait:

  ```mojo
  var thing = SomeStruct()
  # Infer the parameter `T`!
  fun_with_traits(thing)
  ```

  Traits can also inherit from other traits, which simply requires that
  implementers of the child trait also conform to all parent traits.

  ```mojo
  trait Parent:
      fn parent_func(self): ...

  trait Child(Parent):
      fn child_func(self): ...
  ```

  Then, both child and parent trait methods can be invoked on instances of
  the trait `Child`. As well, an instance of the child trait can be converted to
  an instance of the parent trait.

  ```mojo
  fn the_parents[T: Parent](x: T):
      x.parent_func()

  fn the_children[T: Child](x: T):
      x.child_func()
      x.parent_func()
      # Upcast `x` from instance of `Child` to `Parent`.
      the_parents(x)
  ```

  For more information, see the [Traits page](/docs/manual/traits/)
  in the Mojo Manual.

- A fundamental `Destructable` trait has been added to the language. This is a
  core trait that every trait automatically conforms to. This enables
  destruction of generic types and generic collections.

  **Note:** We're aware that this trait might be better spelled `Destructible`.
  We're planning on removing it in the future and moving its functionality to
  `AnyType` so that any type that doesn't provide its own destructor will have
  a default, no-op destructor.

- We've added some traits to the standard library, you can implement these on
  your own types:

  - [`Destructable`](/docs/std/builtin/anytype/AnyType/)
  - [`Copyable`](/docs/std/builtin/value/Copyable/)
  - [`Movable`](/docs/std/builtin/value/Movable/)
  - [`Stringable`](/docs/std/builtin/str/Stringable/)
  - [`Intable`](/docs/std/builtin/int/Intable/)
  - [`Sized`](/docs/std/builtin/len/Sized/)
  - [`CollectionElement`](/docs/std/builtin/value/CollectionElement/)

- We added built-in [`len()`](/docs/std/builtin/len/len/), `str()`, and
  `int()` functions, which work with types that implement the `Sized`,
  `Stringable`, and `Intable` traits, respectively.

- [`DynamicVector`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/) is now a
  proper generic collection that can use any type that implements the `Movable`
  and `Copyable` traits. This means you can now write, for example,
  `DynamicVector[String]`. Also, `DynamicVector` now invokes its element
  destructors upon destruction, so `_del_old` has been deleted.

- `print` now works on any types that implement `Stringable` by invoking their
  `__str__` method:

  ```mojo
  @value
  struct BoxedInt(Stringable):
      var value: Int

      fn __str__(self) -> String:
          return self.value

  print(BoxedInt(11), "hello traits!", BoxedInt(42))
  ```

## ⭐️ New

- The [Mojo Manual](/docs/manual/) is an all-new, complete Mojo user guide.
  It doesn't include *everything* about Mojo yet, but it includes a lot,
  and more than the original programming
  manual (now deprecated).

  Plus, the entire Mojo Manual and other Mojo docs are now [open-sourced on
  GitHub](https://github.com/modular/modular/tree/main/mojo/docs), and we'd love
  to accept contributions to help us improve them!

- Mojo now supports partial automatic parameterization: when a function is
  declared with an argument of a partially bound type, the unbound parameters of
  that type are implicitly added to the function's input parameters. For
  example:

  ```mojo
  @value
  struct Fudge[a: Int, b: Int, c: Int = 7]: ...

  # These function declarations are roughly equivalent:
  fn eat(f: Fudge[5]): ...               # implicitly parameterized
  fn eat[_b: Int](f: Fudge[5, _b]): ...  # explicitly parameterized
  ```

  In the first signature for `eat()`, the `b` parameter isn't bound, so it's
  *implicitly* added as an input parameter on the function.

  In the second signature for `eat()`, the author has explicitly defined an
  input parameter (`_b`), which is bound to the second parameter on the argument
  type (which happens to be `b`).

  Both functions can be called like this:

  ```mojo
  eat(Fudge[5, 8]())
  ```

  Mojo infers the value of the `b` parameter from the argument (in this case,
  8).

  With the second signature, you can also pass the `_b` parameter value
  explicitly:

  ```mojo
  eat[3](Fudge[5, 3]())
  ```

  Moreover, Mojo now allows you to explicitly mark parameters as unbound using
  the `_` as syntax meaning "placeholder for an unbound parameter." For example:

  ```mojo
  # These function declarations are roughly equivalent:
  fn eat(f: Fudge[5, _, c=_]): ...                    # implicitly parameterized
  fn eat(f: Fudge[c=_, a=5, b=_]): ...                # implicitly parameterized
  fn eat[_b: Int, _c: Int](f: Fudge[5, _b, _c]): ...  # explicitly parameterized
  ```

  The first two signatures explicitly unbind the `b` and `c` parameters.

  In the last signature, the `_b` and `_c` parameters are explicitly declared by
  the author, and bound to the `b` and `c` parameters in the argument type.

  Any of these signatures can be called like this:

  ```mojo
  eat(Fudge[5, 8]())
  eat(Fudge[5, 8, 9]())
  ```

  Note that the default parameter values of struct parameters are bound, unless
  explicitly unbound by the user.

  For more information, see the
  [Mojo Manual](/docs/manual/parameters/#fully-bound-partially-bound-and-unbound-types).

- Parametric types can now be partially bound in certain contexts. For example,
  a new `Scalar` type alias has been added defined as:

  ```mojo
  alias Scalar = SIMD[size=1]
  ```

  Which creates a parametric type alias `Scalar` with a single parameter of type
  `DType`. Types can also be partially or fully bound in other contexts. For
  instance, `alias` declarations of type values inside functions now work
  properly:

  ```mojo
  fn type_aliases():
      alias T = SIMD
      print(T[DType.float32, 1]())
      alias Partial = T[type=DType.int32]
      print(Partial[2]())
  ```

- The `__mlir_op` feature now supports operations that return multiple results.
  To use them, you write the `_type` field as a `Tuple` of types. For example:

  ```mojo
  # The `ret` variable has type `Tuple[Int, Int]`.
  let ret = __mlir_op.`multi_result_op`[_type=(Int, Int)]()
  ```

- Mojo now has the ability to read raw bytes from a file using the
  [`read_bytes()`](/docs/std/io/file/FileHandle/#read_bytes) method.
  For example:

  ```mojo
  with open("file.binary", "r") as f:
      data = f.read_bytes()
  ```

- A size argument was added to the
[`read()`](/docs/std/io/file/FileHandle/#read) and
[`read_bytes()`](/docs/std/io/file/FileHandle/#read_bytes) methods on
the builtin `file.FileHandle`. The size argument defaults to -1 and maintains
the previous "read to EOF" behavior when size is negative.

  ```mojo
  with open("file.binary", "r") as f:
      data1 = f.read_bytes(1024)
      data2 = f.read_bytes(256)
  ```

- [`Path`](/docs/std/pathlib/path/Path/) now has `read_bytes()` and
  `read_text()` methods to read file contents from a path:

  ```mojo
  let text_path = Path("file.txt")
  let text = text_path.read_text()

  let binary_path = Path("file.binary")
  let data = binary_path.read_bytes()
  ```

- `Tensor` has new `save()` and `load()` methods to save and load to file. These
  methods preserve shape and datatype information. For example:

  ```mojo
  let tensor = Tensor[DType.float32]()
  tensor.save(path)

  let tensor_from_file = Tensor[DType.float32].load(path)
  ```

- Subscripting added to
  [`DTypePointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/) and
  [`Pointer`](/docs/std/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer/):

  ```mojo
  let p = DTypePointer[DType.float16].alloc(4)
  for i in range(4):
      p[i] = i
      print(p[i])
  ```

- `file.FileHandle` now has a `seek()` method.

- [`String`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/) now has an
  [`rfind()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#rfind) method
  analogous to Python's `str.rfind()`.

- `String` now has an
  [`split()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#split) method
  analogous to Python's `str.split()`.

- [`Path`](/docs/std/pathlib/path/Path/) now has a
  [`suffix()`](/docs/std/pathlib/path/Path/#suffix) method analogous to
  Python's `pathlib.Path.suffix`.

- The Mojo REPL now supports indented expressions, making it a bit easier to
  execute expressions copied from an indented block (such as a doc string).

- The Mojo Language Server now implements the Document Symbols request. IDEs use
  this to provide support for **Outline View** and **Go to Symbol**. This
  addresses [Issue #960](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/960).

- The Mojo Language Server now shows documentation when code completing modules
  or packages in `import` statements.

- The Mojo Language Server now supports processing code examples, defined as
  markdown Mojo code blocks, inside of doc strings. This enables IDE features
  while writing examples in API documentation.

- The Mojo Language Server now provides semantic token information, providing
  better highlighting for symbols whose semantics are not statically analyzable.

- The Mojo Language Server now classifies doc strings as folding ranges,
  making them easier to collapse, reducing vertical space while editing.

- Command line options for the `mojo` driver that take arguments can now be
  written in either of two ways: both `--foo FOO` and `--foo=FOO`. Previously,
  only the former was valid.

## 🦋 Changed

- Variadic list types
  [`VariadicList`](/docs/std/builtin/variadics/VariadicList/) and
  [`VariadicListMem`](/docs/std/builtin/variadics/VariadicListMem/)
  are now iterable. Variadic arguments are automatically projected into one of
  these types inside the function body, so var args can be iterated:

  ```mojo
  fn print_ints(*nums: Int):
      for num in nums:
          print(num)
      print(len(nums))
  ```

- The assert functions in the [`testing`](/docs/std/testing/testing/)
  package now raise an `Error` when the assertion fails instead of returning a
  `Bool` for whether the assertion succeeded or not.

- Parameters of [`AnyType`](/docs/std/builtin/type_aliases/) type are no
  longer (implicitly) assumed to be register-passable. A new `AnyRegType` type
  is used to represent generic types that are register passable.

- Changing the units in a [`benchmark`](/docs/std/benchmark/benchmark/)
  report is now an argument instead of a parameter:

  ```mojo
  let report = benchmark.run[timer]()
  report.print(Unit.ms)
  ```

- Default values on `inout` arguments are no longer permitted, i.e. the
  following will now raise an error:

  ```mojo
  fn inout_default(inout x: Int = 2): ...
  ```

- The `to_string()` function has been removed from
  [`PythonObject`](/docs/std/python/python_object/PythonObject/) in favor of
  the new `__str__()` function. This composes better with traits so it can be
  used with the generic `str()` function.

## 🛠️ Fixed

- [#734](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/734) - Consumption of struct
  works only for types with a `__del__` method.

- [#910](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/910) - Parser crash when
  using memory-only generic type as return of function that `raise`s.

- [#1060](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1060) - Mojo happily parses
  code that has messed up indentation

- [#1159](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1159) - The language server
  doesn't warn about bad return type.

- [#1166](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1166) - warning: unreachable
  code after return statement with context manager

- [#1098](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1098) - The language server
  doesn't highlight properties of PythonObjects correctly.

- [#1153](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1153) - The language server
  crashes when parsing an invalid multi-nested module import.

- [#1236](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1236) - The language server
  doesn't show autocomplete in if statements.

- [#1246](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1246) - Warning diagnostics
  are transient in the presence of caching.

## Known Issue

- There is an issue affecting Jupyter notebooks that use autotuning and traits.
  This issue only manifests on macOS, and the same code runs without issue
  outside of the notebooks. This issue affects the *Matrix multiplication in
  Mojo* notebook.
