---
title: Mojo v0.6.1
date: 2023-12-18
---

## ⭐️ New

- The Mojo REPL now provides limited support for the `%cd` magic command.

  This command automatically maintains an internal stack of directories you
  visit during the REPL session. Usage:

  - `%cd 'dir'`: change to directory `dir` and push it on the directory stack.
  - `%cd -`: pop the directory stack and change to the last visited directory.

- Structs decorated with `@value` now automatically conform to the
  [`Movable`](/docs/std/builtin/value/Movable/)
  and [`Copyable`](/docs/std/builtin/value/Copyable/) built-in traits.

- [`String`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/) now has new
  [`toupper()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#upper) and
  [`tolower()`](/docs/std/collections/string/string/String/#lower) methods
  analogous, respectively, to Python's `str.toupper()` and `str.tolower()`.

- Added a [`hash()`](/docs/std/hashlib/hash/hash/) built-in function and
  [`Hashable`](/docs/std/hashlib/hash/Hashable/) trait for types
  implementing the `__hash__()` method. Future releases will add `Hashable`
  support to Standard Library types. In the meantime, the `hash` module includes
  a version of the `hash()` function that works on arbitrary byte strings. To
  generate hashes for [`SIMD`](/docs/std/builtin/simd/SIMD/) types, you
  use the internal `_hash_simd()` function:

  ```mojo
  from builtin.hash import _hash_simd

  fn gen_simd_hash():
      let vector = SIMD[DType.int64, 4](1, 2, 3, 4)
      let hash = _hash_simd(vector)
  ```

- Several standard library types now conform to the
  [`CollectionElement`](/docs/std/builtin/value/CollectionElement/) trait. These
  types include [`Bool`](/docs/std/builtin/bool/Bool/),
  [`StringLiteral`](/docs/std/builtin/string_literal/StringLiteral/),
  [`DynamicVector`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/), `Tensor`, `TensorShape`,
  and `TensorSpec`.

## 🦋 Changed

- `utils.vector` has been moved to a new `collections` package to make
  space for new collections. This means that if you had previous code
  that did `from utils.vector import DynamicVector`, it now needs to
  be `from collections.vector import DynamicVector` due to the move.

- The special destructor method `__del__()` has been changed to enforce
  that it cannot raise an error. Raising destructors are not supported properly
  at the moment.

## 🛠️ Fixed

- [#1421](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1421) - Fixed a crash when
  using Tuples in the REPL.

- [#222](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/222) - Generate an error
  for obviously self recursive functions.

- [#1408](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1408) - Fix overload
  resolution when candidates can return generic types.

- [#1413](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1413) and
  [#1395](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1395) - Do not crash when
  re-declaring a builtin declaration.

- [#1307](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1307) - Fix compatibility of
  function signatures that only differ in default argument values.

- [#1380](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1380) - Fix printing
  of empty `String`.
