---
title: Mojo v0.7.0
date: 2024-01-25
---

## ⭐️ New

- A new Mojo-native dictionary type,
  [`Dict`](/docs/std/collections/dict/) for storing key-value pairs.
  `Dict` stores values that conform to the
  [`CollectionElement`](/docs/std/builtin/value/CollectionElement/)
  trait. Keys need to conform to the new
  [`KeyElement`](/docs/std/collections/dict/#keyelement) trait, which is
  not yet implemented by other standard library types. In the short term, you
  can create your own wrapper types to use as keys. For example, the following
  sample defines a `StringKey` type and uses it to create a dictionary that maps
  strings to `Int` values:

  ```mojo
  from collections.dict import Dict, KeyElement

  @value
  struct StringKey(KeyElement):
      var s: String

      fn __init__(inout self, owned s: String):
          self.s = s ^

      fn __init__(inout self, s: StringLiteral):
          self.s = String(s)

      fn __hash__(self) -> Int:
          return hash(self.s)

      fn __eq__(self, other: Self) -> Bool:
          return self.s == other.s

  def main():
      var d = Dict[StringKey, Int]()
      d["cats"] = 1
      d["dogs"] = 2
      print(len(d))         # prints 2
      print(d["cats"])      # prints 1
      print(d.pop("dogs"))  # prints 2
      print(len(d))         # prints 1
  ```

  We plan to add `KeyElement` conformance to standard library types in
  subsequent releases.

- Users can opt-in to assertions used in the standard library code by
  specifying `-D MOJO_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS` when invoking `mojo` to
  compile your source file(s). In the case that an assertion is fired,
  the assertion message will be printed along with the stack trace
  before the program exits. By default, assertions are *not enabled*
  in the standard library right now for performance reasons.

- The Mojo Language Server now implements the References request. IDEs use
  this to provide support for **Go to References** and **Find All References**.
  A current limitation is that references outside of the current document are
  not supported, which will be addressed in the future.

- The [`sys.info`](/docs/std/sys/info/) module now includes
  `num_physical_cores()`, `num_logical_cores()`, and `num_performance_cores()`
  functions.

- Homogeneous variadic arguments consisting of memory-only types, such as
  `String` are more powerful and easier to use. These arguments are projected
  into a
  [`VariadicListMem`](/docs/std/builtin/variadics/VariadicListMem/).

  (Previous releases made it easier to use variadic lists of register-passable
  types, like `Int`.)

  Subscripting into a `VariadicListMem` now returns the element instead of an
  obscure internal type. In addition, we now support `inout` and `owned`
  variadic arguments:

  ```mojo
  fn make_worldly(inout *strs: String):
      # This "just works" as you'd expect!
      for i in range(len(strs)):
          strs[i] += " world"
  fn main():
      var s1: String = "hello"
      var s2: String = "konnichiwa"
      var s3: String = "bonjour"
      make_worldly(s1, s2, s3)
      print(s1)  # hello world
      print(s2)  # konnichiwa world
      print(s3)  # bonjour world
  ```

  (Previous releases made it easier to use variadic lists, but subscripting into
  a `VariadicListMem` returned a low-level pointer, which required the user to
  call `__get_address_as_lvalue()` to access the element.)

  Note that subscripting the variadic list works nicely as above, but iterating
  over the variadic list directly with a `for` loop produces a `Reference`
  (described below) instead of the desired value, so an extra subscript is
  required; We intend to fix this in the future.

  ```mojo
  fn make_worldly(inout *strs: String):
      # Requires extra [] to dereference the reference for now.
      for i in strs:
          i[] += " world"
  ```

  Heterogeneous variadic arguments have not yet been moved to the new model, but
  will in future updates.

  Note that for variadic arguments of register-passable types like `Int`, the
  variadic list contains values, not references, so the dereference operator
  (`[]`) is not required. This code continues to work as it did previously:

  ```mojo
  fn print_ints(*nums: Int):
      for num in nums:
          print(num)
      print(len(nums))
  ```

- Mojo now has a prototype version of a safe
  [`Reference`](/docs/std/memory/pointer/Pointer/) type. The compiler's
  lifetime tracking pass can reason about references to safely extend local
  variable lifetime, and check indirect access safety. The `Reference` type
  is brand new (and currently has no syntactic sugar) so it must be explicitly
  dereferenced with an empty subscript: `ref[]` provides access to the
  underlying value.

  ```mojo
  fn main():
      var a: String = "hello"
      var b: String = " references"

      var aref = Reference(a)
      aref[] += b
      print(a)  # prints "hello references"

      aref[] += b
      # ^last use of b, it is destroyed here.

      print(aref[]) # prints "hello references references"
      # ^last use of a, it is destroyed here.
  ```

  While the `Reference` type has the same in-memory representation as a C
  pointer or the Mojo `Pointer` type, it also tracks a symbolic "lifetime" value
  so the compiler can reason about the potentially accessed set of values. This
  lifetime is part of the static type of the reference, so it propagates through
  generic algorithms and abstractions built around it.

  The `Reference` type can form references to both mutable and immutable memory
  objects, e.g. those on the stack or borrowed/inout/owned function arguments.
  It is fully parametric over mutability, eliminating the [problems with code
  duplication due to mutability
  specifiers](https://duckki.github.io/2024/01/01/inferred-mutability.html) and
  provides the base for unified user-level types. For example, it could be
  used to implement an array slice object that handles both mutable and
  immutable array slices.

  While this is a major step forward for the lifetimes system in Mojo, it is
  still *very* early and awkward to use. Notably, there is no syntactic sugar
  for using references, such as automatic dereferencing. Several aspects of it
  need to be more baked. It is getting exercised by variadic memory arguments,
  which is why they are starting to behave better now.

  Note: the safe `Reference` type and the unsafe pointer types are defined in
  the same module, currently named `memory.unsafe`. We expect to restructure
  this module in a future release.

- Mojo now allows types to implement `__refattr__()` and `__refitem__()` to
  enable attribute and subscript syntax with computed accessors that return
  references. For common situations where these address a value in memory this
  provides a more convenient and significantly more performant alternative to
  implementing the traditional get/set pairs. Note: this may be changed in the
  future when references auto-dereference—at that point we may switch to just
  returning a reference from `__getattr__()`.
- Parametric closures can now capture register passable typed values by copy
  using the `__copy_capture` decorator. For example, the following code will
  print `5`, not `2`.

  ```mojo
  fn foo(x: Int):
      var z = x

      @__copy_capture(z)
      @parameter
      fn formatter() -> Int:
          return z
      z = 2
      print(formatter())

  fn main():
      foo(5)
  ```

- String now implements KeyElement and may be used as a key in Dict.
- More robust support for structs with fields of self referencing types.
  For example, the following code will work and print `0`:

  ```mojo
  struct Foo(CollectionElement):
      var vec: DynamicVector[Self]

      fn __init__(inout self: Self):
          self.vec = DynamicVector[Self]()

      fn __moveinit__(inout self: Self, owned existing: Self):
          self.vec = existing.vec ^

      fn __copyinit__(inout self: Self, existing: Self):
          self.vec = existing.vec

  fn main():
      var foo = Foo()
      print(len(foo.vec))
  ```

## ❌ Removed

- The `__takeinit__` special constructor form has been removed from the
  language. This "non-destructive move" operation was previously wired into the
  `x^` transfer operator, but had unpredictable behavior that wasn't consistent.
  Now that Mojo has traits, it is better to model this as an explicit `.take()`
  operation on a type, which would transfer out the contents of the type without
  ending its lifetime. For example, for a type that holds a pointer, `take()`
  might return a new instance pointing to the same data, and null out its own
  internal pointer.

  This change makes it clear when a lifetime is ended versus when the
  contents of an LValue are explicitly taken.

- The current implementation of autotuning has been deprecated, as Mojo's
  autotuning implementation is undergoing a redesign. Tutorials around the
  current implementation have also been removed as they are being rewritten.

  Consequently, the `autotune()`, `autotune_fork()`, and `search()` functions
  have been removed from the standard library.

- The `_OldDynamicVector` type that worked only on register passable element
  types has been removed. Please migrate uses to
  [`DynamicVector`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/) which
  works on both register passable and memory types.

- The `UnsafeFixedVector` in `utils.vector` has been removed. We recommend using
  either [`DynamicVector`](/docs/std/collections/list/List/)
  or [`InlinedFixedVector`](/docs/std/collections/inline_array/InlineArray/)
  instead.

- The `@adaptive` decorator has been removed from the language. Any uses of the
  decorator in a non-search context can be replaced with `@parameter if`. For
  example:

  ```mojo
  @adaptive
  fn foo[a: Bool]():
      constrained[a]()
      body1()

  @adaptive
  fn foo[a: Bool]():
      constrained[not a]()
      body2()
  ```

  Can be rewritten as:

  ```mojo
  fn foo[a: Bool]():
      @parameter
      if a:
          body1()
      else:
          body2()
  ```

  Consequently, the special `__adaptive_set` attribute has been removed as well.

- Result parameters have been removed from Mojo. Result parameter declarations
  in function parameter lists are no longer allowed, nor are forward alias
  declarations. This includes removing the `param_return` statement.

- The `@noncapturing` and `@closure` decorators have been removed due to
  refinements and improvements to the closure model. See below for more details!

## 🦋 Changed

- The Mojo closure model has been refined to be more straightforward and safe.
  Mojo has two closure types: parameter closures and runtime closures. Parameter
  closures can be used in higher-order functions and are the backbone of
  functions like `vectorize` and `parallelize`. They are always denoted by
  `@parameter` and have type `fn() capturing -> T` (where `T` is the return
  type).

  On the other hand, runtime closures are always dynamic values, capture values
  by invoking their copy constructor, and retain ownership of their capture
  state. You can define a runtime closure by writing a nested function that
  captures values:

  ```mojo
  fn outer(b: Bool, x: String) -> fn() escaping -> None:
      fn closure():
          print(x) # 'x' is captured by calling String.__copyinit__

      fn bare_function():
          print("hello") # nothing is captured

      if b:
          # closure can be safely returned because it owns its state
          return closure^

      # function pointers can be converted to runtime closures
      return bare_function
  ```

  The type of runtime closures are of the form `fn() escaping -> T`. You
  can pass equivalent function pointers as runtime closures.

  Stay tuned for capture list syntax for move capture and capture by reference,
  and a more unified closure model!

- The `@unroll(n)` decorator can now take a parameter expression for
  the unroll factor, i.e. `n` can be a parameter expression that is
  of integer type.

- The `cpython` module in the `python` package has been moved to be an internal
  module, i.e, `_cpython`.

- `AnyType` and `Destructable` have been unified into a single trait, `AnyType`.
  Every nominal type (i.e. all structs) now automatically conform to `AnyType`.

- Previously, the `mojo package` command would output a Mojo package that
  included both partly-compiled Mojo code, as well as fully-compiled machine
  code for a specific computer architecture -- the architecture of the machine
  being used to invoke the `mojo package` command.

  Now, `mojo package` only includes partly-compiled Mojo code. It is only fully
  compiled for the specific computer architecture being used at the point that
  the package is first `import`-ed. As a result, Mojo packages are smaller and
  more portable.

- The `simd_width` and `dtype` parameters of `polynomial_evaluate` have been
  switched. Based on the request in
  [#1587](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1587), the
  `polynomial_evaluate` function has also been extended so that the
  `coefficients` parameter can take either a either a
  [`StaticTuple`](/docs/std/utils/static_tuple/StaticTuple/) or a
  [`VariadicList`](/docs/std/builtin/variadics/VariadicList/).

- As a tiny step towards removing `let` declarations, this release removes the
  warning: `'var' was never mutated, consider switching to a 'let'`.

## 🛠️ Fixed

- [#1595](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1595) - Improve error
  message when trying to materialize `IntLiteral` in runtime code.
- Raising an error from the initializer of a memory-only type now works
  correctly in the presence of complex control flow. Previously Mojo could run
  the destructor on `self` before it was initialized when exiting with an
  error.
- [#1096](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1096) - Improve warning
  messages for dead code in conditionals like `or` expressions.
- [#1419](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1419) - Fix assertion
  failure with uninitialized lattice values.
- [#1402](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1402) - Fix movable trait
  not detected on recursive struct implemented with `AnyPointer`.
- [#1399](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1399) - Fix parser crash
  when a parameter type in a struct that implements a trait is misspelled.
- [#1152](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1152) - Allow mutable `self`
  argument when overloading operators using dunder methods.
- [#1493](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1493) - Fix crash in
  `DynamicVector` copy constructor in certain situations.
- [#1316](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1316) - The `benchmark.keep`
  function now properly handles vector types.
- [#1505](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1505) - The `simd.shuffle`
  operation now works on 64 element permutations.
- [#1355](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1355) - Fix `String.find()`
  returning wrong value when starting index is non-zero.
- [#1367](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1367) - Fix
  `String.replace()` returning incorrect results for multi-character search
  strings.
- [#1535](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1535) - Invalid error `field
  'w.x.y' destroyed out of the middle of a value, preventing the overall value
  from being destroyed`.
- [#1475](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1475) - Assertion failure in
  nested loop.
- [#1591](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1591) - Assertion failure
  when using `AnyType` struct member.
- [#1503](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1503) - Rename the mojo
  build of LLDB to `mojo-lldb`, to prevent name collisions with the system's
  LLDB.
- [#1542](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1542) - `@unroll` does not
  accept alias as unroll factor.
- [#1443](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1443) - Compiler crash on
  variadic list of traits.
- [#1604](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1604) - Variable of trivial
  type not destroyed by transferring ownership.
- [#1341](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/1341) - Segmentation fault
  when passing closures around.
- [#217](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues/217) - Closure state is
  stack allocated.
